.. _release_notes_1610:

=====
16.10
=====

Summary
=======

The 16.10 OpenStack Charm release includes updates for the following charms:

* aodh
* barbican
* ceilometer
* ceilometer-agent
* ceph
* ceph-mon
* ceph-osd
* ceph-radosgw
* cinder
* cinder-backup
* cinder-ceph
* designate
* designate-bind
* glance
* hacluster
* heat
* keystone
* lxd
* neutron-api
* neutron-api-odl
* neutron-openvswitch
* neutron-gateway
* nova-cloud-controller
* nova-compute
* odl-controller
* openstack-dashboard
* openvswitch-odl
* percona-cluster
* rabbitmq-server
* swift-proxy
* swift-storage

New Charm Features
==================

Ubuntu 16.10 support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The OpenStack charms have been validated for Ubuntu 16.10 (Yakkety). The
Yakkety series charms are available in the charm-store via jujucharms.com. For
example:

.. code:: bash

    juju deploy --series yakkety cs:nova-compute


OpenStack Newton support on 16.04 and 16.10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The charms provide full support for OpenStack Newton. For further details and
documentation on Openstack Newton, please check out
https://releases.openstack.org/newton

To deploy OpenStack Newton on Ubuntu 16.04, use the 'openstack-origin'
configuration option, for example:


.. code:: bash

    cat > config.yaml << EOF
    nova-cloud-controller:
      openstack-origin: cloud:xenial-newton
    EOF

    juju deploy --config config.yaml nova-cloud-controller

OpenStack Newton is part of the Ubuntu 16.10 release, so no additional
configuration is required for deployment:

.. code:: bash

    juju deploy --series yakkety cs:nova-cloud-controller

To upgrade an existing Mitaka based deployment on Ubuntu 16.04 to the Newton
release, simple re-configure the charm with a new openstack-origin
configuration:


.. code:: bash

    juju config nova-cloud-controller openstack-origin=cloud:xenial-newton

Please ensure that ceph services are upgraded before services that consume ceph
resources, such as cinder, glance and nova-compute.

Rewrite of neutron-api-odl and openvswitch-odl
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-api-odl and openvswitch-odl charms have both been rewritten using
the `reactive framework <https://pythonhosted.org/charms.reactive>`__  and the
`OpenStack charm layers <https://github.com/openstack?query=charm-layer>`__
and `interfaces <https://github.com/openstack?query=charm-interface>`__.

Upgrading an existing deployment which uses previous versions of these charms is
not supported.

Application version support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Charms will now display the version of the application they are deploying via
Juju 2.0 status output.

Swift Proxy swauth
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The swift-proxy charm now supports the `swauth <https://swauth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__
authentication module, supporting deployment in standalone configurations
without the use of keystone.  To enable this option:

.. code:: bash

    juju config swift-proxy auth-type=swauth

An 'add-user' action is provided to setup end user credentials in swauth.

Serial Console Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support has been added for accessing instances via the optionally enabled serial
console feature provided in Nova.

Serial console access is enabled using a new config flag in the nova-cloud-controller
charm.

This feature is only supported in OpenStack Juno or later, and replaces
the standard output to the nova console-log.

.. code:: bash

    juju config nova-cloud-controller enable-serial-console=true


AppArmor Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A selection of charms have been enabled with AppArmor profiles for the
services that they manage. This includes:

* nova-compute
* ceph-osd
* neutron-gateway

AppArmor profiles are disabled by default and can be enabled using the
aa-profile-mode configuration option. Valid settings are 'complain',
'enforce' or 'disable':

.. code:: bash

    juju config neutron-gateway aa-profile-mode=enforce


hacluster default transport
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For this release of the OpenStack Charms, the hacluster charm will default to
using unicast instead of multicast for corosync communication between units
participating within a cluster.  This configuration has proven more generally
reliable than the previous default of multicast.

If you wish to continue to use the multicast configuration, ensure that you
explicitly set the corosync_transport configuration prior to charm upgrade:

.. code:: bash

    juju config hacluster corosync_transport=multicast

This will ensure that the previous default is maintained during the charm
upgrade process.

Nova LXD block storage support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Nova Compute LXD integration includes support for persistent block device
usage via Cinder.  The first release of this feature only supports the Cinder
iSCSI/LVM reference implementation, and can only be used with the ext4 fileystem
type, enabled using:

.. code:: bash

    juju config lxd enable-ext4-userns=true

Use of ext4 within unprivileged containers is still relatively new in the Linux
Kernel so is not enabled by default.

Barbican
~~~~~~~~

The barbican charm is provided as the base for future HSM enablement for production
grade storage of secrets in an OpenStack cloud.  The charm for this release will
only deploy barbican using the default key store implementation, and as a result
does not support HA deployment. This charm should not currently be considered secure
in any way and is not appropriate for production use in an OpenStack cloud.

Upgrading
=========

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
'upgrade-charm' command:

.. code:: bash

    juju upgrade-charm cinder


Deprecation Notices
===================

Known Issues
============

rabbitmq-server + Juju 2.0/MAAS 2.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

https://bugs.launchpad.net/charms/+source/rabbitmq-server/+bug/1584902

rabbitmq-server charm fails to deploy with Juju 2.0 and MAAS 2.0 due
to changes in DNS hostname management in MAAS 2.0.  To workaround this
use version 5 of the xenial charm:

.. code:: bash

    juju deploy cs:xenial/rabbitmq-server-5

A more complete backwards compatible solution to this bug is being
worked on.

ceilometer and aodh + Juju 1.25/MAAS 1.9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

https://bugs.launchpad.net/charms/+source/ceilometer/+bug/1632909

ceilometer and aodh charms fail to deploy with Juju 1.25 when deployed
in LXD containers using the MAAS provider due to hostname resolution
issues.  Specifically, the API service will fail to startup, resulting
in a blocked service status.

Adding an entry into /etc/hosts on each LXC unit that correctly maps the
hostname of the unit to its IP address will workaround this issue.

Ubuntu 16.10 + Juju 1.25/MAAS 1.9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju-core/+bug/1632530

Juju 1.25 is unable to start LXC containers on physical servers when deploying
on Ubuntu 16.10 (yakkety).

Bugs Fixed
==========

For the full list of bugs resolved for the 16.10 release please refer to
https://launchpad.net/charms/+milestone/16.10
