.. _release_notes_17.02

=====
17.02
=====

Summary
=======

The 17.02 OpenStack Charm release includes updates for the following charms:

* aodh
* barbican
* ceilometer
* ceilometer-agent
* ceph
* ceph-fs
* ceph-mon
* ceph-osd
* ceph-radosgw
* cinder
* cinder-backup
* cinder-ceph
* designate
* designate-bind
* glance
* hacluster
* heat
* keystone
* keystone-ldap
* lxd
* manila
* manila-generic
* neutron-api
* neutron-api-odl
* neutron-openvswitch
* neutron-gateway
* nova-cloud-controller
* nova-compute
* odl-controller
* openstack-dashboard
* openvswitch-odl
* percona-cluster
* rabbitmq-server
* swift-proxy
* swift-storage

New Charm Features
==================

OpenStack Ocata support on 16.04
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The charms provide full support for OpenStack Ocata. For further details and
documentation on Openstack Ocata please check out
http://releases.openstack.org/ocata

To deploy OpenStack Ocata on Ubuntu 16.04, use the 'openstack-origin'
configuration option, for example:


.. code:: bash

    cat > config.yaml << EOF
    nova-cloud-controller:
      openstack-origin: cloud:xenial-ocata
    EOF

    juju deploy --config config.yaml nova-cloud-controller

To upgrade an existing Mitaka based deployment on Ubuntu 16.04 to the Newton
release, simple re-configure the charm with a new openstack-origin
configuration:


.. code:: bash

    juju config nova-cloud-controller openstack-origin=cloud:xenial-ocata

Please ensure that ceph services are upgraded before services that consume ceph
resources, such as cinder, glance and nova-compute.

percona-cluster and rabbitmq-server clustering improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deploying the percona-cluster or rabbitmq-server charms in clustered
configurations, please use the new min-cluster-size configuration option
to avoid configuration races during unit deployment and clustering:

.. code:: bash

    juju config rabbitmq-server min-cluster-size=3
    juju add-unit -n 2 rabbitmq-server

    juju config percona-cluster min-cluster-size=3
    juju add-unit -n 2 percona-cluster


keystone v3 domain independent identity drivers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The keystone charm now supports use of different identity drivers for v3 domains;
the first implementation of this is using the keystone-ldap subordinate charm that
provides the ability to use an existing LDAP or Active Directory deployment for
authentication of users for a domain. See the keystone-ldap charm for more details.

hacluster minimum units
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For this release of the OpenStack Charms, the hacluster charm will default to
requiring a minimum of 3 units before cluster formation will occur;  this
can be switched back to support two unit clusters:

.. code:: bash

    juju config hacluster cluster_count=2

This change reflects the most common use case for hacluster which is for
deployments of 3 or more units.

ceph-osd availability zone support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-osd charm now supports an availability zone.  This can be utilized to
modify the default of having 1 replica per host.


Ceph FS support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This charm release provides the new ceph-fs charm, providing support for Ceph FS.

.. code:: bash

    juju deploy ceph-fs
    juju add-relation ceph-mon ceph-fs

ceph-radosgw keystone v3 support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-radosgw charm now has support for the keystone v3 API.

ceph-radsogw FastCGI support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Inline with the Ceph project, the ceph-radosgw charm has dropped support for
deployment of the Rados Gateway using Apache and mod_fastcgi; existing deployments
will be reconfigured on upgrade to use the embedded webserver support provided
by the radosgw binaries.

The `use-embedded-webserver` option has been removed from this charm and should be
dropped from any bundles.

ceph pool permissions restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cinder, cinder-ceph, glance, nova-compute and ceph-radosgw charms can now
be optionally configured to request cephx keys with more limited restrictions
on pool access as required for OpenStack deployments.  This is enabled using the
`restrict-ceph-pools` configuration option, for example:

.. code:: bash

    juju config cinder-ceph restrict-ceph-pools=True

Nova LXD block storage support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Nova Compute LXD integration includes support for persistent block device
usage via Cinder using the LVM iSCSI driver; this is now enabled by default.

Upgrading
=========

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
'upgrade-charm' command:

.. code:: bash

    juju upgrade-charm cinder


Deprecation Notices
===================

ZeroMQ messaging support across the charms will be removed during the Pike
development cycle.

PostgreSQL database support across the charms will be removed during the
Pike developement cycle.

Deploy from Source (DFS) support is under review for sustainability and may be
removed during the Pike development cycle.

Known Issues
============

ceilometer and aodh + Juju 1.25/MAAS 1.9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

https://bugs.launchpad.net/charms/+source/ceilometer/+bug/1632909

ceilometer and aodh charms fail to deploy with Juju 1.25 when deployed
in LXD containers using the MAAS provider due to hostname resolution
issues.  Specifically, the API service will fail to startup, resulting
in a blocked service status.

Adding an entry into /etc/hosts on each LXC unit that correctly maps the
hostname of the unit to its IP address will workaround this issue.

Note that this only impacts OpenStack Newton based deployments.

Bugs Fixed
==========

For the full list of bugs resolved for the 17.02 release please refer to
https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/17.02
