.. _release_notes_20.05:

=====
20.05
=====

Summary
-------

The 20.05 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the following
charms. Additional charm support status information is published in the
`OpenStack Charm Guide`_ which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or bug
reports.

OpenStack charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
meet the requirements of payload project health, payload packaging,
upgradability, charm test gates, and the general release guidelines of the
OpenStack Charms project.

* `aodh <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-aodh/>`_
* `barbican <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican/>`_
* `barbican-vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-vault/>`_
* `ceilometer <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer/>`_
* `ceilometer-agent <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer-agent/>`_
* `cinder <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder/>`_
* `cinder-backup <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup/>`_
* `cinder-backup-swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/>`_
* `cinder-ceph <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-ceph/>`_
* `designate <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate/>`_
* `glance <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance/>`_
* `heat <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-heat/>`_
* `keystone <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone/>`_
* `keystone-ldap <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-ldap/>`_
* `keystone-saml-mellon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-saml-mellon/>`_
* `manila <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila/>`_
* `manila-ganesha <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-ganesha/>`_
* `masakari <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari/>`_
* `masakari-monitors <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari-monitors/>`_
* `mysql-innodb-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-innodb-cluster>`_
* `mysql-router <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-router>`_
* `neutron-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api/>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-ovn <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-ovn>`_
* `neutron-dynamic-routing <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-dynamic-routing/>`_
* `neutron-gateway <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-gateway/>`_
* `neutron-openvswitch <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-openvswitch/>`_
* `nova-cell-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cell-controller/>`_
* `nova-cloud-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cloud-controller/>`_
* `nova-compute <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/>`_
* `octavia <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia/>`_
* `octavia-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-dashboard/>`_
* `octavia-diskimage-retrofit <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-diskimage-retrofit/>`_
* `openstack-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-openstack-dashboard/>`_
* `placement <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-placement>`_
* `swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-proxy/>`_
* `swift-storage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-storage/>`_

Other supporting charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
are classified differently because the payload of each is not technically an
OpenStack project.

* `ceph-fs <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-fs/>`_
* `ceph-mon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-mon/>`_
* `ceph-osd <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-osd/>`_
* `ceph-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-proxy/>`_
* `ceph-radosgw <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-radosgw/>`_
* `ceph-rbd-mirror <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/>`_
* `cinder-purestorage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-purestorage/>`_
* `designate-bind <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate-bind/>`_
* `glance-simplestreams-sync <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance-simplestreams-sync/>`_
* `gnocchi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-gnocchi/>`_
* `hacluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/>`_
* `ovn-central <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-central>`_
* `ovn-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-chassis>`_
* `ovn-dedicated-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-dedicated-chassis>`_
* `pacemaker-remote <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-pacemaker-remote/>`_
* `percona-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-percona-cluster/>`_
* `rabbitmq-server <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-rabbitmq-server/>`_
* `vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/>`_

Tech-preview charms (Beta)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms do not have stable releases, even though they may technically have
"stable/yy.mm" branches. Regardless of any maintenance and testing that these
charms may receive, some work (major bugs, payload packaging issues, project
issues, general QA) is still required before the charms are ready for
production use (promoted to Stable).

* `ceph-iscsi <https://github.com/openstack-charmers/charm-ceph-iscsi/>`_
* `trilio-data-mover <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-data-mover/>`_
* `trilio-dm-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-dm-api/>`_
* `trilio-horizon-plugin <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-horizon-plugin/>`_
* `trilio-wlm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-wlm/>`_

Alpha charms (Edge)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This classification of charms includes those which may be a proof-of-concept, a
test fixture, or one which is in active development. They are not intended to
be used in production. Supportability, upgradability, testability may be
lacking, either from a charm perspective, or from the workload package
perspective.

* `barbican-softhsm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-softhsm/>`_
* `manila-generic <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-generic/>`_
* `tempest <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-tempest/>`_
* `watcher <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher/>`_
* `watcher-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher-dashboard/>`_

Maintenance-mode charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms are in maintenance mode, meaning that new features and new
releases are not actively being added or tested with them. Generally, these
were produced for a demo, PoC, or as an example.

* None at this time.

Removed charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

n/a

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ section which
details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
``src/tests/bundles`` directory within the relevant charm repository.

Configuring security compliance for Keystone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Keystone has several configuration options available in order to comply with
standards such as the Payment Card Industry -- Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS)
v3.1. The keystone charm can now set these options.

The ``password-security-compliance`` charm option sets Keystone service options
for the ``[security_compliance]`` section of Keystone's configuration file.

.. note::

   Please ensure that the page `Security compliance and PCI-DSS`_ is consulted
   before setting these options. The charm does set the
   ``ignore_change_password_upon_first_use`` and ``ignore_password_expiry``
   options to 'true' for the service accounts to prevent lockout of service
   users.

Please consult the `Keystone charm README`_ for more details on the option.

Cinder charm support for Juju storage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cinder charm has now grown support for Juju storage. Please see `Juju
storage`_ and the `Cinder charm README`_ for more details.

Enable counting of quota usage from Placement service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The upstream configuration parameter 'count_usage_from_placement' introduced
in OpenStack Train is now supported. This boolean parameter enables the
counting of quota usage from the placement service instead of from the cell
databases.

The parameter is set via ``quota-count-usage-from-placement`` option in the
nova-cloud-controller charm. The default value of this option is 'False'.

.. note::

   Please ensure to consult the page `Nova Train configuration options`_ in the
   OpenStack documentation before setting the charm option.

OVS hardware offload with Mellanox ConnectX-5
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Neutron charms (neutron-api and neutron-openvswitch) now support hardware
offload of network connectivity for instances via Open vSwitch with Mellanox
ConnectX-5 (or later) network cards.

Details on how to deploy Neutron with this feature can be found in the `NIC
hardware offload appendix`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_.

Networking tools for charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a result of refactoring the charm codebase responsible for configuration of
SR-IOV VF functions and to support the new OVS hardware offload features for
Mellanox network cards the neutron-openvswitch charm now makes use of two
networking tools (sriov-netplan-shim and mlnx-switchdev-mode) provided via the
`Networking Tools PPA`_.

This PPA can be mirrored for offline deployments - the neutron-openvswitch
charm may be configured to use a mirror for these packages using the
'networking-tools-source' configuration option.

Change of default behaviour for Neutron API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-api charm has a change in default behaviour when deploying
OpenStack Ussuri (or newer). The value of configuration option
``manage-neutron-plugin-legacy-mode`` has changed from 'True' to 'False'.

When 'True' the network management plugin is chosen via the ``neutron-plugin``
configuration option. When 'False' plugin is chosen through the deployment of a
subordinate charm and relating it to the neutron-api application.

The most prominent effect of the change is that you will need to set up a
subordinate plugin charm (and possibly associated charms) to get a functional
network service. Sample bundles will be updated to enable OVN by default. See
`Open Virtual Network (OVN)`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ for
details on OVN.

This is made within the following upstream context:

* During the Ussuri cycle the upstream Neutron project has promoted the ML2+OVN
  to an in-tree driver and moving forward it will be the default reference
  implementation, replacing the traditional ML2+OVS and ML2+OVS+DVR
  implementations. See the `Toward Convergence of ML2+OVS+DVR and OVN`_ Neutron
  specification for more information.

* The desire for a more sensible default mode of operation enabling easier
  integration with the rich plugin ecosystem available for OpenStack Neutron.

Upgrading neutron-api or upgrading OpenStack will not trigger the new
behaviour.

New charms
----------

MySQL 8 charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new supported charms to deploy MySQL 8 for OpenStack are introduced:
mysql-innodb-cluster and mysql-router. These charms will replace the
percona-cluster charm completely for Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal) and newer
deployments.

The mysql-innodb-cluster charm deploys MySQL 8 in an InnoDB cluster with a
read/write node and N number of read-only nodes. This charm does not support
single-unit or non-clustered deployments.

The mysql-router charm deploys MySQL 8 mysqlrouter which will proxy database
requests from the principle charm application to a MySQL 8 InnoDB cluster.
MySQL Router handles cluster communication and understands the cluster schema.
The charm is deployed as a subordinate on the principle charm application and
should be named accordingly at deploy time (e.g.
<application-name>-mysql-router).

A simple example deployment:

.. code-block:: none

   juju deploy keystone
   juju deploy mysql-router keystone-mysql-router
   juju deploy -n 3 mysql-innodb-cluster
   juju add-relation keystone-mysql-router:shared-db keystone:shared-db
   juju add-relation keystone-mysql-router:db-router mysql-innodb-cluster:db-router

A more complex example bundle is available in `OpenStack bundles Focal
Ussuri`_.

In Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal) percona-cluster will no longer be available. The
migration process is documented in the `Specific series upgrade procedures`_
page in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_.

Masakari charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The masakari, masakari-monitors, and pacemaker-remote charms are now supported
charms. From Stein onwards the charms can be used to provide instance failover
in the event of hypervisor failure. From Ussuri onwards the charms can restart
an instance if it fails. The charms do not support using Masakari to manage
processes on the hypervisor. Details on how to deploy the Masakari charms can
be found in the `Automated instance recovery`_ appendix in the `OpenStack
Charms Deployment Guide`_.

Bug `LP #1773765`_ is likely to affect on-going support of a Masakari
deployment.

OVN charms
~~~~~~~~~~

Four new supported charms to deploy OVN are introduced: neutron-api-plugin-ovn,
ovn-central, ovn-chassis and ovn-dedicated-chassis. These charms provide the
underlying networking facilities for, and integrate with, OpenStack Neutron
through the OVN ML2 driver.

Key differences from the legacy ML2+OVS solution:

* All forwarding is programmed into Open vSwitch using OpenFlow rules
  (Layer2 switching, Layer3 routing, Security group rules, DHCP, DNS). This
  allows for less agents and namespaces on hypervisors, and may also
  allow for Layer 3 routing to be offloaded to NICs with appropriate driver and
  firmware support.

  .. warning::

     Support for hardware offload in conjunction with OVN as provided by the
     charms is an experimental feature. OVN uses different tunnel protocols and
     programs flow tables in a different way than legacy ML2+OVS and this has
     had less exposure to our validation of NIC firmware and driver support.

* Distributed East/West traffic by default, highly available North/South
  routing by default.

* More flexible configuration of external Layer3 connectivity, dedicated
  gateway nodes and wiring external connectivity to every hypervisor is not
  required.

OVN is the preferred default for new deployments of OpenStack Ussuri on Ubuntu
18.04 LTS (Bionic) and 20.04 LTS (Focal). Please refer to the `Open Virtual
Network (OVN)`_ appendix in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ for more
details on deploying OpenStack with OVN. A complete example bundle is available
in `OpenStack bundles Focal Ussuri`_.

.. note::

   There are feature `gaps from ML2+OVS`_ and deploying legacy ML2+OVS with
   the OpenStack Charms is still available if you require any of the missing
   features.

Documentation on, and actions for, migrating existing clouds to OVN will be
delivered as part of the 20.10 OpenStack Charms release.

Preview charm features
----------------------

TrilioVault support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

New charms are provided for the deployment of TrilioVault, which provides an
OpenStack integrated snapshot and restore service for workloads. Note that
this set of preview charms are targeted only to the Bionic (Ubuntu 18.04 LTS)
series at this time.

For more details see the `TrilioVault appendix`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_.

.. note::

   TrilioVault is a commerical snapshot and restore solution for OpenStack and
   does not form part of the OpenStack project.

ceph-iscsi
~~~~~~~~~~

The new preview ceph-iscsi charm can be used to deploy Ceph iSCSI gateways.
These gateways provide iSCSI targets backed by a Ceph cluster. The charm
requires Focal (Ubuntu 20.04 LTS) and cannot be deployed in a LXD container. It
can, however, co-exist with the ceph-osd charm. For more details see the `Ceph
iSCSI Gateway README`_.

Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, charm application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug reports.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

Deprecation notices
-------------------

Neutron Firewall-as-a-Service (FWaaS)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Due to lack of maintainers the `Neutron FWaaS project has been deprecated`_ in
the Neutron stadium and will be removed in the W cycle. Subsequently the charm
support for FWaaS is deprecated for Ussuri and onwards.

Charm support for FWaaS will be retained for enabled OpenStack releases and
configuration options will have no effect when deployed with the W release and
onwards.

.. note::

   A side effect of the FWaaS deprecation is that no new development has
   occurred upstream in a while. Subsequently there exists no support for FWaaS
   for use with OVN. Depending on your requirements instance security groups
   may be used instead.

Removed features
----------------

Keystone support for admin-token
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``admin-token`` configuration option has been removed from the keystone
charm. The use of the Keystone admin token feature is not recommended and is at
odds with the `Identity service Security Checklist`_.

.. note::

   There was no deprecation warning for removal of this configuration option as
   its removal was required to fix a long standing Keystone charm bug. See
   `LP #1859844`_ for details.

Known issues
------------

OpenStack Ussuri packages for Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Due to the slightly-offset release dates of OpenStack Ussuri and Ubuntu 20.04
LTS, the final upstream stable release of Ussuri is undergoing a stable
release update (SRU) into Ubuntu 20.04 LTS as of the date of this charms
release.

Testing and validation for this OpenStack Charms release has taken place using
the packages that are currently in ``distro-proposed``. The status of the SRU
process can be tracked in the following bugs:

* `LP #1877642`_
* `LP #1863021`_

To consume the proposed packages in a deployment, use ``distro-proposed`` as
the value for the ``openstack-origin`` and ``source`` charm configuration
options.

Swift-Proxy and Policy.d overrides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The is no policy.d override mechanism available for Swift (and, therefore, the
swift-proxy charm) as Swift does not use the ``oslo.policy`` library. Swift
uses its own authentication system that connects with Keystone and validates
according to Swift's own configuration files. The ``operator-roles``
configuration option allows the operator to control which Swift operator roles
will be authenticated, as usual. See the `Swift Auth System`_ for further
details.

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deploying the glance-simplestreams-sync charm on Bionic a more recent
version of the simplestreams package must be installed by configuring a PPA:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config glance-simplestreams-sync source=ppa:simplestreams-dev/trunk

See bug `LP #1790904`_ for details.

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack releases Pike and earlier does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.

Restart Nova services after adding certificates relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A race condition exists with the use of the 'certificates' relation. When SSL
certificates are issued Nova services may attempt to talk to the placement API
over HTTP while the API has already changed to HTTPS. See bug `LP #1826382`_.

To mitigate against this, restart the nova-compute and nova-scheduler services
once certificates have been issued:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application nova-compute "systemctl restart nova-compute"
   juju run --application nova-cloud-controller "systemctl restart nova-scheduler"


TrilioVault Data Mover charm upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For deployments using prior versions of the trilio-data-mover charm (as provided
by Trilio) the relation between the trilio-data-mover charm and rabbitmq-server
must be removed and re-added to ensure that specific access for the data-mover
service is provided for RabbitMQ.

.. code-block:: none

   juju remove-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server
   juju add-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server

Designate upgrades to Train
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When upgrading Designate to OpenStack Train, there is an encoding issue between
the designate-producer and memcached that causes the designate-producer to
crash. See bug `LP #1828534`_. This can be resolved by restarting the
memcached service.

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application=memcached 'sudo systemctl restart memcached'

Octavia and neutron-openvswitch in LXD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The octavia charm requires a neutron-openvswitch subordinate which means that
if it runs in a container, the openvswitch kernel module must be loaded before
the container starts. Module loading is done by LXD based on the profile
applied by Juju and taken from the neutron-openvswitch charm. However, due to
`LP #1876849`_ in Juju, there is no guarantee that the profile will be applied
before neutron-openvswitch execution starts in a container.

The issue is more likely to happen on disaggregated deployments where octavia
units run in LXD containers on machines that do not have any units of
neutron-openvswitch running on bare metal.

In order to work around the error an operator needs to make sure the
``openswitch`` module is loaded on the host and then restart the
``openvswitch-switch.service`` service inside the LXD container where the
respective neutron-openvswitch unit is present. After that the unit error can
be resolved.

Ceph RBD Mirror and Ceph Octopus
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Due to an unresolved permission issue the ceph-rbd-mirror charm will stay in a
blocked state after configuring mirroring for pools when connected to a Ceph
Octopus cluster. See bug `LP #1879749`_ for details.

Minimum Juju version for deploying Octavia
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Juju 2.7 and above should be used for deployments with the octavia charm since
it has dependencies that require the ``LANG`` environment variable to be set
during package installation. Juju versions prior to 2.7 do not set the ``LANG``
variable in hook executions which leads to the default python decoder being set
to ASCII - this results in decoding issues when one of the dependent package's
``setup.py`` script gets executed and reads a source file containing UTF-8 code
units. As a result, the following error can be seen in a hook error:

.. code-block:: console

   UnicodeDecodeError: 'ascii' codec can't decode byte 0xc8 in position 129: ordinal not in range(128)

See bug `LP #1879184`_ for more information.

This issue affects existing Juju 2.6 environments as well if a charm upgrade is
performed. It will be addressed by fixing `GH #173`_.

Bugs fixed
----------

The 20.05 OpenStack Charms release includes 89 bug fixes. Refer to the `20.05
milestone`_ in Launchpad for the list of resolved bugs.

Next release info
-----------------

Please see the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ for current information.

.. LINKS
.. _OpenStack Upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _Open Virtual Network (OVN): https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-ovn.html
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _OpenStack bundles Focal Ussuri: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/openstack-bundles/blob/master/development/openstack-base-focal-ussuri-ovn/bundle.yaml
.. _20.05 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.05
.. _Policy Overrides: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-policy-overrides.html
.. _Neutron documentation: https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/admin/config-fip-port-forwardings.html
.. _placement API: https://docs.openstack.org/placement/ussuri/
.. _HA with pause/resume: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html#ha-with-pause-resume
.. _Specific series upgrade procedures: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-series-upgrade-specific-procedures.html#percona-series-upgrade-to-focal
.. _Swift Auth system: https://docs.openstack.org/swift/latest/overview_auth.html
.. _Swift Global Cluster: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-swift-gc.html
.. _Toward Convergence of ML2+OVS+DVR and OVN: http://specs.openstack.org/openstack/neutron-specs/specs/ussuri/ml2ovs-ovn-convergence.html
.. _Vault deployment and configuration: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-vault.html
.. _Security compliance and PCI-DSS: https://docs.openstack.org/keystone/train/admin/configuration.html#security-compliance-and-pci-dss
.. _Keystone charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-keystone/blob/master/README.md
.. _Neutron FWaaS project has been deprecated: https://review.opendev.org/#/c/708675/
.. _Cinder charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-cinder/blob/master/README.md
.. _Juju storage: https://juju.is/docs/storage
.. _TrilioVault appendix: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-trilio-vault.html
.. _Automated instance recovery: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-masakari.html
.. _Ceph iSCSI Gateway README: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/charm-ceph-iscsi/blob/master/README.md
.. _Nova Train configuration options: https://docs.openstack.org/nova/train/configuration/config.html#quota.count_usage_from_placement
.. _NIC hardware offload appendix: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-hardware-offload.html
.. _Networking Tools PPA: https://launchpad.net/~openstack-charmers/+archive/ubuntu/networking-tools
.. _gaps from ML2+OVS: https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/ussuri/ovn/gaps.html
.. _Identity service Security Checklist: https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/identity/checklist.html

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1773765: https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari/+bug/1773765
.. _LP #1790904: https://bugs.launchpad.net/simplestreams/+bug/1790904
.. _LP #1826382: https://bugs.launchpad.net/nova/+bug/1826382
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1859844: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-keystone/+bug/1859844
.. _LP #1828534: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1828534
.. _LP #1876849: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-openvswitch/+bug/1876849
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1877642: https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1877642
.. _LP #1863021: https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1863021
.. _LP #1879184: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-octavia/+bug/1879184/comments/9
.. _GH #173: https://github.com/juju-solutions/layer-basic/issues/173
