.. _release_notes_20.08:

=================================
20.08 (Draft version in progress)
=================================

Summary
-------

The 20.08 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the following
charms. Additional charm support status information is published in the
`OpenStack Charm Guide`_ which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or bug
reports.

OpenStack charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
meet the requirements of payload project health, payload packaging,
upgradability, charm test gates, and the general release guidelines of the
OpenStack Charms project.

* `aodh <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-aodh/>`_
* `barbican <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican/>`_
* `barbican-vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-vault/>`_
* `ceilometer <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer/>`_
* `ceilometer-agent <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer-agent/>`_
* `cinder <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder/>`_
* `cinder-backup <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup/>`_
* `cinder-backup-swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/>`_
* `cinder-ceph <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-ceph/>`_
* `designate <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate/>`_
* `glance <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance/>`_
* `heat <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-heat/>`_
* `keystone <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone/>`_
* `keystone-ldap <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-ldap/>`_
* `keystone-saml-mellon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-saml-mellon/>`_
* `manila <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila/>`_
* `manila-ganesha <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-ganesha/>`_
* `masakari <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari/>`_
* `masakari-monitors <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari-monitors/>`_
* `mysql-innodb-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-innodb-cluster>`_
* `mysql-router <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-router>`_
* `neutron-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api/>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-ovn <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-ovn>`_
* `neutron-dynamic-routing <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-dynamic-routing/>`_
* `neutron-gateway <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-gateway/>`_
* `neutron-openvswitch <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-openvswitch/>`_
* `nova-cell-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cell-controller/>`_
* `nova-cloud-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cloud-controller/>`_
* `nova-compute <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/>`_
* `octavia <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia/>`_
* `octavia-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-dashboard/>`_
* `octavia-diskimage-retrofit <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-diskimage-retrofit/>`_
* `openstack-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-openstack-dashboard/>`_
* `placement <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-placement>`_
* `swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-proxy/>`_
* `swift-storage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-storage/>`_

Other supporting charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
are classified differently because the payload of each is not technically an
OpenStack project.

* `ceph-fs <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-fs/>`_
* `ceph-mon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-mon/>`_
* `ceph-osd <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-osd/>`_
* `ceph-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-proxy/>`_
* `ceph-radosgw <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-radosgw/>`_
* `ceph-rbd-mirror <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/>`_
* `cinder-purestorage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-purestorage/>`_
* `designate-bind <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate-bind/>`_
* `glance-simplestreams-sync <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance-simplestreams-sync/>`_
* `gnocchi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-gnocchi/>`_
* `hacluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/>`_
* `ovn-central <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-central>`_
* `ovn-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-chassis>`_
* `ovn-dedicated-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-dedicated-chassis>`_
* `pacemaker-remote <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-pacemaker-remote/>`_
* `percona-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-percona-cluster/>`_
* `rabbitmq-server <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-rabbitmq-server/>`_
* `vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/>`_

Tech-preview charms (Beta)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms do not have stable releases, even though they may technically have
"stable/yy.mm" branches. Regardless of any maintenance and testing that these
charms may receive, some work (major bugs, payload packaging issues, project
issues, general QA) is still required before the charms are ready for
production use (promoted to Stable).

* `ceph-iscsi <https://github.com/openstack-charmers/charm-ceph-iscsi/>`_
* `trilio-data-mover <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-data-mover/>`_
* `trilio-dm-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-dm-api/>`_
* `trilio-horizon-plugin <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-horizon-plugin/>`_
* `trilio-wlm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-wlm/>`_

Alpha charms (Edge)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This classification of charms includes those which may be a proof-of-concept, a
test fixture, or one which is in active development. They are not intended to
be used in production. Supportability, upgradability, testability may be
lacking, either from a charm perspective, or from the workload package
perspective.

* `barbican-softhsm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-softhsm/>`_
* `manila-generic <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-generic/>`_
* `tempest <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-tempest/>`_
* `watcher <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher/>`_
* `watcher-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher-dashboard/>`_

Maintenance-mode charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms are in maintenance mode, meaning that new features and new
releases are not actively being added or tested with them. Generally, these
were produced for a demo, PoC, or as an example.

* None at this time.

Removed charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

n/a

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ section which
details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
``src/tests/bundles`` directory within the relevant charm repository.

Charm cinder-ceph now requires 'ceph-access' relation to Charm nova-compute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to ensure a functional nova-compute application, the 'ceph-access'
relation is now required between the cinder-ceph charm and the nova-compute
charm when cinder-ceph is related to the cinder charm. Otherwise, the charm
will go into the blocked state.

This is due to this change:

   Without a relation to at least one nova-compute application a cinder-ceph
   backend will not be functional as the libvirt secrets will not have been
   created to allow access to the ceph cluster from libvirt/qemu.

   -- `Require relation to nova-compute application`_

This probably won't affect most existing, deployed, clouds, but *may* affect
test bundles that now won't complete deployment.

To add the relation:

.. code-block:: none

   juju add-relation nova-compute:ceph-access cinder-ceph:ceph-access

All bundles that use cinder-ceph should be checked and the relation added.

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The glance-simplestreams-sync charm now installs simplestreams as a snap.
As such it no longer has a 'source' configuration option - the snapstore
channel to use for the snap can be configured using the 'channel' option.

New charms
----------

Preview charm features
----------------------

Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, charm application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug reports.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

Deprecation notices
-------------------

Removed features
----------------

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The glance-simplestreams-sync charm no longer supports deployment with
the rabbitmq-server charm. Bundles which specify this relation will need
to be updated.

Known issues
------------

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deploying the glance-simplestreams-sync charm on Bionic a more recent
version of the simplestreams package must be installed by configuring a PPA:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config glance-simplestreams-sync source=ppa:simplestreams-dev/trunk

See bug `LP #1790904`_ for details.

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack releases Pike and earlier does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.

Restart Nova services after adding certificates relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A race condition exists with the use of the 'certificates' relation. When SSL
certificates are issued Nova services may attempt to talk to the placement API
over HTTP while the API has already changed to HTTPS. See bug `LP #1826382`_.

To mitigate against this, restart the nova-compute and nova-scheduler services
once certificates have been issued:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application nova-compute "systemctl restart nova-compute"
   juju run --application nova-cloud-controller "systemctl restart nova-scheduler"

TrilioVault Data Mover charm upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For deployments using prior versions of the trilio-data-mover charm (as
provided by Trilio) the relation between the trilio-data-mover charm and
rabbitmq-server must be removed and re-added to ensure that specific access for
the data-mover service is provided for RabbitMQ.

.. code-block:: none

   juju remove-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server
   juju add-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server

TrilioVault package upgrades
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Changing the value of the 'triliovault-pkg-source' option does not currently
trigger a package upgrade although the apt sources for the unit are updated.

Packages can be manually upgraded after changing this option - for example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application trilio-dm-api "sudo apt -y dist-upgrade"

See bug `LP #1879904`_ for more details.

Designate upgrades to Train
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When upgrading Designate to OpenStack Train, there is an encoding issue between
the designate-producer and memcached that causes the designate-producer to
crash. See bug `LP #1828534`_. This can be resolved by restarting the memcached
service.

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application=memcached 'sudo systemctl restart memcached'

Octavia and neutron-openvswitch in LXD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The octavia charm requires a neutron-openvswitch subordinate which means that
if it runs in a container, the openvswitch kernel module must be loaded before
the container starts. Module loading is done by LXD based on the profile
applied by Juju and taken from the neutron-openvswitch charm. However, due to
`LP #1876849`_ in Juju, there is no guarantee that the profile will be applied
before neutron-openvswitch execution starts in a container.

The issue is more likely to happen on disaggregated deployments where octavia
units run in LXD containers on machines that do not have any units of
neutron-openvswitch running on bare metal.

In order to work around the error an operator needs to make sure the
``openswitch`` module is loaded on the host and then restart the
``openvswitch-switch.service`` service inside the LXD container where the
respective neutron-openvswitch unit is present. After that the unit error can
be resolved.

Ceph RBD Mirror and Ceph Octopus
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Due to an unresolved permission issue the ceph-rbd-mirror charm will stay in a
blocked state after configuring mirroring for pools when connected to a Ceph
Octopus cluster. See bug `LP #1879749`_ for details.

Minimum Juju version for deploying Octavia
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Juju 2.7 and above should be used for deployments with the octavia charm since
it has dependencies that require the ``LANG`` environment variable to be set
during package installation. Juju versions prior to 2.7 do not set the ``LANG``
variable in hook executions which leads to the default python decoder being set
to ASCII - this results in decoding issues when one of the dependent package's
``setup.py`` script gets executed and reads a source file containing UTF-8 code
units. As a result, the following error can be seen in a hook error:

.. code-block:: console

   UnicodeDecodeError: 'ascii' codec can't decode byte 0xc8 in position 129: ordinal not in range(128)

See bug `LP #1879184`_ for more information.

This issue affects existing Juju 2.6 environments as well if a charm upgrade is
performed. It will be addressed by fixing `GH #173`_.

Bugs fixed
----------

The 20.08 OpenStack Charms release includes XX bug fixes. Refer to the `20.08
milestone`_ in Launchpad for the list of resolved bugs.

Next release info
-----------------

Please see the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ for current information.

.. LINKS
.. _OpenStack Upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _Open Virtual Network (OVN): https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-ovn.html
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _OpenStack bundles Focal Ussuri: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/openstack-bundles/blob/master/development/openstack-base-focal-ussuri-ovn/bundle.yaml
.. _20.08 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.08
.. _Policy Overrides: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-policy-overrides.html
.. _Neutron documentation: https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/admin/config-fip-port-forwardings.html
.. _placement API: https://docs.openstack.org/placement/ussuri/
.. _HA with pause/resume: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html#ha-with-pause-resume
.. _Specific series upgrade procedures: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-series-upgrade-specific-procedures.html#percona-series-upgrade-to-focal
.. _Swift Auth system: https://docs.openstack.org/swift/latest/overview_auth.html
.. _Swift Global Cluster: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-swift-gc.html
.. _Toward Convergence of ML2+OVS+DVR and OVN: http://specs.openstack.org/openstack/neutron-specs/specs/ussuri/ml2ovs-ovn-convergence.html
.. _Vault deployment and configuration: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-vault.html
.. _Security compliance and PCI-DSS: https://docs.openstack.org/keystone/train/admin/configuration.html#security-compliance-and-pci-dss
.. _Keystone charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-keystone/blob/master/README.md
.. _Neutron FWaaS project has been deprecated: https://review.opendev.org/#/c/708675/
.. _Cinder charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-cinder/blob/master/README.md
.. _Juju storage: https://juju.is/docs/storage
.. _TrilioVault appendix: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-trilio-vault.html
.. _Automated instance recovery: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-masakari.html
.. _Ceph iSCSI Gateway README: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/charm-ceph-iscsi/blob/master/README.md
.. _Nova Train configuration options: https://docs.openstack.org/nova/train/configuration/config.html#quota.count_usage_from_placement
.. _NIC hardware offload appendix: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-hardware-offload.html
.. _Networking Tools PPA: https://launchpad.net/~openstack-charmers/+archive/ubuntu/networking-tools
.. _gaps from ML2+OVS: https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/ussuri/ovn/gaps.html
.. _Identity service Security Checklist: https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/identity/checklist.html

.. COMMITS
.. _Require relation to nova-compute application: https://review.opendev.org/#/c/731437/

.. BUGS
.. _GH #173: https://github.com/juju-solutions/layer-basic/issues/173
.. _LP #1773765: https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari/+bug/1773765
.. _LP #1790904: https://bugs.launchpad.net/simplestreams/+bug/1790904
.. _LP #1826382: https://bugs.launchpad.net/nova/+bug/1826382
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1859844: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-keystone/+bug/1859844
.. _LP #1828534: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1828534
.. _LP #1876849: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-openvswitch/+bug/1876849
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1877642: https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1877642
.. _LP #1863021: https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1863021
.. _LP #1879184: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-octavia/+bug/1879184/comments/9
.. _LP #1879904: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-trilio-horizon-plugin/+bug/1879904
