.. _release_notes_20.10:

=================================
20.10 (Draft version in progress)
=================================

Summary
-------

The 20.10 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the charms
described in the following sections. Refer to the `20.10 milestone`_ in
Launchpad for the list of resolved bugs and see the `Release schedule`_ for
past and future releases.

Additional charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

OpenStack charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
meet the requirements of payload project health, payload packaging,
upgradability, charm test gates, and the general release guidelines of the
OpenStack Charms project.

* `aodh <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-aodh/>`_
* `barbican <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican/>`_
* `barbican-vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-vault/>`_
* `ceilometer <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer/>`_
* `ceilometer-agent <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer-agent/>`_
* `cinder <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder/>`_
* `cinder-backup <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup/>`_
* `cinder-backup-swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/>`_
* `cinder-ceph <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-ceph/>`_
* `designate <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate/>`_
* `glance <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance/>`_
* `heat <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-heat/>`_
* `keystone <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone/>`_
* `keystone-ldap <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-ldap/>`_
* `keystone-saml-mellon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-saml-mellon/>`_
* `manila <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila/>`_
* `manila-ganesha <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-ganesha/>`_
* `masakari <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari/>`_
* `masakari-monitors <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari-monitors/>`_
* `mysql-innodb-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-innodb-cluster>`_
* `mysql-router <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-router>`_
* `neutron-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api/>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-arista <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-ovn <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-ovn>`_
* `neutron-dynamic-routing <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-dynamic-routing/>`_
* `neutron-gateway <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-gateway/>`_
* `neutron-openvswitch <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-openvswitch/>`_
* `nova-cell-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cell-controller/>`_
* `nova-cloud-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cloud-controller/>`_
* `nova-compute <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/>`_
* `octavia <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia/>`_
* `octavia-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-dashboard/>`_
* `octavia-diskimage-retrofit <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-diskimage-retrofit/>`_
* `openstack-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-openstack-dashboard/>`_
* `placement <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-placement>`_
* `swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-proxy/>`_
* `swift-storage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-storage/>`_

Other supporting charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
are classified differently because the payload of each is not technically an
OpenStack project.

* `ceph-fs <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-fs/>`_
* `ceph-mon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-mon/>`_
* `ceph-osd <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-osd/>`_
* `ceph-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-proxy/>`_
* `ceph-radosgw <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-radosgw/>`_
* `ceph-rbd-mirror <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/>`_
* `cinder-purestorage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-purestorage/>`_
* `designate-bind <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate-bind/>`_
* `glance-simplestreams-sync <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance-simplestreams-sync/>`_
* `gnocchi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-gnocchi/>`_
* `hacluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/>`_
* `ovn-central <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-central>`_
* `ovn-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-chassis>`_
* `ovn-dedicated-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-dedicated-chassis>`_
* `pacemaker-remote <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-pacemaker-remote/>`_
* `percona-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-percona-cluster/>`_
* `rabbitmq-server <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-rabbitmq-server/>`_
* `vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/>`_
* `trilio-data-mover <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-data-mover/>`_
* `trilio-dm-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-dm-api/>`_
* `trilio-horizon-plugin <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-horizon-plugin/>`_
* `trilio-wlm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-wlm/>`_

Tech-preview charms (Beta)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms do not have stable releases, even though they may technically have
"stable/yy.mm" branches. Regardless of any maintenance and testing that these
charms may receive, some work (major bugs, payload packaging issues, project
issues, general QA) is still required before the charms are ready for
production use (promoted to Stable).

* `ceph-iscsi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-iscsi/>`_
* `keystone-kerberos <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-kerberos/>`_

Alpha charms (Edge)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This classification of charms includes those which may be a proof-of-concept, a
test fixture, or one which is in active development. They are not intended to
be used in production. Supportability, upgradability, testability may be
lacking, either from a charm perspective, or from the workload package
perspective.

* `barbican-softhsm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-softhsm/>`_
* `manila-generic <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-generic/>`_
* `tempest <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-tempest/>`_
* `watcher <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher/>`_
* `watcher-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher-dashboard/>`_

Maintenance-mode charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms are in maintenance mode, meaning that new features and new
releases are not actively being added or tested with them. Generally, these
were produced for a demo, PoC, or as an example.

* None at this time.

Removed charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

n/a

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ section which
details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
``src/tests/bundles`` directory within the relevant charm repository.

Gnocchi and external root CA for S3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The gnocchi charm now supports an additional configuration option:
trusted-external-ca-cert. This option installs and configures an external root
CA in the gnocchi units. This is useful when an encrypted S3 (storage backend)
endpoint uses certificates that are not managed by Vault.

Arista - Supported releases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-api-plugin-arista charm now supports all OpenStack releases starting
with Queens. See `LP #1890628`_ for more details.

Neutron Gateway and additional data on ports and bridges
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-gateway charm now marks the openvswitch ports and bridges it creates
as managed by the charm. It does so by setting an ``external-id`` on them. See
the `Open vSwitch Integration Guide for Centralized Control`_ for details.

Even the ports and bridges created before upgrading to this release will be
be marked. Marking our ports and bridges will allow us to implement some
cleanup mechanism without risking removing too much.

See bug `LP #1809190`_ for details.

cinder charm: Allow specifying the default_volume type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new feature has been added to allow setting the default volume type, via the
new configuration parameter ``default-volume-type``, for new volumes if one is
not specified at creation time. This is to support scenarios where multiple
storage backends are to be used with cinder. Please see related Bug `LP #1884548`_
for more details and consult the cinder charm.

New charms
----------

Preview charm features
----------------------

Deprecation notices
-------------------

ceph-radosgw charm: Deprecate the pool-prefix config option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``pool-prefix`` configuration option for ceph-radosgw charm is deprecated and
will be removed. See bug `LP #1856106`_ for a full discussion.


Removed features
----------------

Neutron Gateway and network bridges
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-gateway charm no longer supports adding a Linux bridge to an
openvswitch bridge.

Rationale: this feature relied on the NetworkManager (a.k.a. ifupdown) feature
``veth``. Unfortunately starting from Bionic (18.04) ifupdown isn't shipped by
default anymore as it is being replaced by netplan.io, which doesn't implement
this feature yet (see bug `LP #1876730`_). Using ifupdown on Bionic also causes
issues with LXD containers (see bug`LP #1877594`_).

See bug `LP #1877594`_ for details on how to migrate away from this feature.

Known issues
------------

Barbican DB migration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With Focal Ussuri, running command ``barbican-manage db upgrade`` against a
barbican application that is backed by a MySQL InnoDB Cluster will lead to a
failure (see `LP #1899104`_). This was discovered while resolving `LP
#1827690`_.

Both the charm bug `LP #1827690`_ and the package bug `LP #1899104`_ are known
issues that will de addressed shortly after the 20.10 release.

The package bug only affects Focal Ussuri and is not present in Victoria nor is
it present when using (Bionic) Percona Cluster as the back-end DB.

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack releases Pike and earlier does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.


IP SAN sym links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using the vault certificates relation and vault is configured with
``auto-generate-root-ca-cert`` set to True (and/or the deprecated setting,
``totally-unsecure-auto-unlock`` set to true) some charms may be susceptible to
`LP #1893847`_.

The symptom is missing sym links to certificates for Subject Alternative Name
(SAN) IP addresses. For example, for Virtual IP (VIP) addresses for services.
Apache configuration may fail as it will point to a certificate for the VIP(s).

The workaround is to set the above settings to False and utilize the
post-deployment actions for preparing vault as documented in the `Vault
section`_ and the `Certificate Lifecycle Management`_ section of the charm
deployment guide.

Restart Nova services after adding certificates relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A race condition exists with the use of the 'certificates' relation. When SSL
certificates are issued Nova services may attempt to talk to the placement API
over HTTP while the API has already changed to HTTPS. See bug `LP #1826382`_.

To mitigate against this, restart the nova-compute and nova-scheduler services
once certificates have been issued:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application nova-compute "systemctl restart nova-compute"
   juju run --application nova-cloud-controller "systemctl restart nova-scheduler"

TrilioVault Data Mover charm upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For deployments using prior versions of the trilio-data-mover charm (as
provided by Trilio) the relation between the trilio-data-mover charm and
rabbitmq-server must be removed and re-added to ensure that specific access for
the data-mover service is provided for RabbitMQ.

.. code-block:: none

   juju remove-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server
   juju add-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server

TrilioVault File Recovery Manager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mounting snapshots using the File Recovery Manager appliance fails due to
permissions errors encountered during the libvirt/qemu snapshot mount process
on compute nodes. See bug `LP #1888389`_ for details.

Octavia and neutron-openvswitch in LXD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

   This issue is due to a Juju bug, which was fixed in Juju 2.8.1.

The octavia charm requires a neutron-openvswitch subordinate which means that
if it runs in a container, the openvswitch kernel module must be loaded before
the container starts. Module loading is done by LXD based on the profile
applied by Juju and taken from the neutron-openvswitch charm. However, due to
`LP #1876849`_ in Juju, there is no guarantee that the profile will be applied
before neutron-openvswitch execution starts in a container.

The issue is more likely to happen on disaggregated deployments where octavia
units run in LXD containers on machines that do not have any units of
neutron-openvswitch running on bare metal.

In order to work around the error an operator needs to make sure the
``openswitch`` module is loaded on the host and then restart the
``openvswitch-switch.service`` service inside the LXD container where the
respective neutron-openvswitch unit is present. After that the unit error can
be resolved.

OpenStack os-brick, Ceph Octopus, and Focal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ceph RBD Mirror and Cinder Backup Swift Proxy charms do not work with Ceph
Octopus due to an issue with the upstream OpenStack os-brick library (see bug
`LP #1865754`_). As Octopus is the default Ceph version on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
(Focal) these charms cannot be used on Focal until the issue is resolved. Here
are the resulting charm-specific behaviours:

* ceph-rbd-mirror charm: The charm will enter a blocked state after configuring
  pool mirroring (see bug `LP #1879749`_).
* cinder-backup-swift-proxy charm: If a backup volume operation is performed
  the resulting volume will be in error (see bug `LP #1890821`_).

Series upgrade - percona-cluster and vault charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

percona-cluster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

During a series upgrade from Xenial (16.04) to Bionic (18.04) the
percona-cluster charm may fail during the ``post-series-upgrade`` hook. This
appears to be because the percona-cluster charm may erroneously delete the file
``/var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded`` (see bug `LP #1868326`_). If this
occurs, then executing the following commands on the failed unit will recover
the hook and allow it to complete the series upgrade:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run percona-cluster/N 'echo "done" > /var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded'
   juju resolved percona-cluster/N

This may be required for each percona-cluster unit.

vault
^^^^^

If a series upgrade is attempted while Vault is sealed then manual intervention
will be required (see bugs `LP #1886083`_ and `LP #1890106`_). The vault leader
unit (which will be in error) will need to be unsealed and the hook error
resolved. The `Vault section`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ has
detailed unsealing instructions and the hook error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved vault/N


Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug report filing.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

.. LINKS
.. _20.10 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.10
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _Release schedule: release-schedule.html
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _Vault section: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-vault.html
.. _Open vSwitch Integration Guide for Centralized Control: https://docs.openvswitch.org/en/latest/topics/integration/
.. _Certificate Lifecycle Management: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-certificate-management.html

.. COMMITS
.. _Require relation to nova-compute application: https://review.opendev.org/#/c/731437/

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1809190: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-gateway/+bug/1809190
.. _LP #1826382: https://bugs.launchpad.net/nova/+bug/1826382
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1876849: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-openvswitch/+bug/1876849
.. _LP #1877594: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-gateway/+bug/1877594
.. _LP #1876730: https://bugs.launchpad.net/netplan/+bug/1876730
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1890628: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista/+bug/1890628
.. _LP #1798794: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-osd/+bug/1798794
.. _LP #1868326: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-percona-cluster/+bug/1868326
.. _LP #1890106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1890106
.. _LP #1886083: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1886083
.. _LP #1888389: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-trilio-data-mover/+bug/1888389
.. _LP #1865754: https://bugs.launchpad.net/tripleo/+bug/1865754
.. _LP #1890821: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/+bug/1890821
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1884548: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1884548
.. _LP #1856106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-radosgw/+bug/1856106
.. _LP #1827690: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-barbican/+bug/1827690
.. _LP #1899104: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/barbican/+bug/1899104
.. _LP #1893847: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-helpers/+bug/1893847
