.. _release_notes_21.04:

=================================
21.04 (Draft version in progress)
=================================

Summary
-------

The 21.04 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the charms
described on the `Charms`_ page. As of this release, the project consists of 60
supported (stable) charms.

For the list of bugs resolved in this release refer to the `21.04 milestone`_
in Launchpad.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the `Release
schedule`_.

General charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_, that
details its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles``
directory of the relevant charm repository.

ceph-osd charm: marking individual OSDs as 'out' or 'in'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-osd charm actions ``osd-out`` and ``osd-in`` can now target individual
OSD volumes. The previous behaviour was to act on all volumes - there is a new
keyword 'all' for that use case. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run-action --wait ceph-osd/0 osd-out osds=osd.0,osd.1
   juju run-action --wait ceph-osd/1 osd-out osds=all

Trilio charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Trilio charms will no longer be released with the same cadence as the other
OpenStack charms. Instead, they will be released shortly after releases of the
Trilio code. For instance, Trilio 4.1 is due in February and the Trilio charms
will be released shortly thereafter.

hacluster charm: scaling down
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The hacluster charm has a new action: ``update-ring``.

When a clustered application (working alongside the hacluster application) is
scaled down (i.e. ``remove-unit``) nodes in the corosync ring will not be
removed. The ``update-ring`` action performs the removal and updates the
corosync configuration accordingly. Failure to run this action will leave the
cluster in an "incomplete" state. The corosync ring does not need to be updated
when scaling up; it is automatically extended. See the `hacluster charm`_
README for more information.

New charms
----------

n/a

Preview charm features
----------------------

Magnum charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new tech-preview charms are now available for the deployment of OpenStack
Magnum:

* magnum
* magnum-dashboard

Magnum deploys Container Orchestration Engines (COE) such as Kubernetes, Docker
Swarm, and Apache Mesos onto OpenStack instances.

Manila charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new tech-preview charms are added to the current list of Manila charms:

* manila-dashboard
* manila-netapp

Manila is OpenStack's shared filesystem service.

Deprecation notices
-------------------

hacluster charm ``stonith_enabled`` option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``stonith_enabled`` configuration option for the hacluster charm is
deprecated and will be removed in the next release of the OpenStack Charms.
Resource fencing (aka STONITH) is now always enabled for every node in the
cluster. See bug `LP #1881114`_ and `What is STONITH?`_ for more details.

Removed features
----------------

RabbitMQ Ceph relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `ceph` relation in the rabbitmq-server charm is deprecated and will be
removed in the 21.04 charm release. The relation exists to support an obsolete
method of RabbitMQ clustering which involved sharing queue data between the
units using RBD volumes.

Runtime configuration of SR-IOV and acceleration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Neutron Open vSwitch and OVN charms will no longer perform runtime
configuration of SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VFs) or hardware acceleration.

Changes made to configuration options ``enable-hardware-offload``,
``enable-sriov`` and ``sriov-numvfs`` must be followed by a reboot of any
neutron-openvswitch or ovn-chassis units in order for the changes to take
effect. This is true regardless of when the changes were made (i.e. at
deploy-time or post-deploy).

This change of charm behaviour is necessary for two reasons:

1. Changing the number of VFs on a running system breaks connectivity to any
   running virtual machines.
2. For Hardware acceleration support there is a particular order in which
   components of the system must be set up for successful operation. Applying
   or changing the configuration at runtime would involve operations like
   removing and re-applying host network configuration, and could also lead to
   NIC firmware malfunction. As such, runtime application of configuration
   changes for the above mentioned configuration options falls outside the
   domain of what the charms can control.

Removed charms
--------------

n/a

Known issues
------------

Lack of FQDN for containers on physical MAAS nodes may affect running services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When Juju deploys to a LXD container on a physical MAAS node, the container is
not informed of its FQDN. The services running in the container will therefore
be unable to determine the FQDN on initial deploy and on reboot.

Adverse effects are service dependent. This issue is tracked in bug `LP
#1896630`_ in an OVN and Octavia context. Several workarounds are documented in
the bug.

Barbican DB migration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With Focal Ussuri, running command ``barbican-manage db upgrade`` against a
barbican application that is backed by a MySQL InnoDB Cluster will lead to a
failure (see bug `LP #1899104`_). This was discovered while resolving bug `LP
#1827690`_.

Both the charm bug `LP #1827690`_ and the package bug `LP #1899104`_ are known
issues that will be addressed shortly after the 20.10 release.

The package bug only affects Focal Ussuri and is not present in Victoria, nor
is it present when using (Bionic) Percona Cluster as the back-end DB.

Series upgrade - vault charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a series upgrade is attempted while Vault is sealed then manual intervention
will be required (see bugs `LP #1886083`_ and `LP #1890106`_). The vault leader
unit (which will be in error) will need to be unsealed and the hook error
resolved. The `vault charm`_ README has unsealing instructions, and the hook
error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved vault/N

Octavia load balancers using OVN provider on Victoria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With OpenStack Victoria, creating an Octavia load balancer that uses the OVN
provider will fail due to bug `LP #1896603`_. This bug does not affect load
balancers that use the Amphora provider.

Ceph iSCSI on Ubuntu 20.10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-iscsi charm can't be deployed on Ubuntu 20.10 (Groovy) due to a Python
library issue. See bug `LP #1904199`_ for details.

Charm upgrade - rabbitmq-server charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A timing issue has been observed during the upgrade of the rabbitmq-server
charm (see bug `LP #1912638`_ for tracking). If it occurs the resulting hook
error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved rabbitmq-server/N

Adding Glance storage backends
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a storage backend is added to Glance a service restart may be necessary in
order for the new backend to be registered. This issue is tracked in bug `LP
#1914819`_.

OVS to OVN migration procedure on Ubuntu 20.10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When performed on Ubuntu 20.10 (Groovy), the procedure for migrating an
OpenStack cloud from ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN may require an extra step due to Open
vSwitch bug `LP #1852221`_.

Following the procedure in the `Migration from Neutron ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN`_
section of the deploy guide, the workaround is to restart the `ovs-vswitchd`
service after resuming the ovn-chassis charm in step 15:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run-action --wait neutron-openvswitch/0 cleanup
   juju run-action --wait ovn-chassis/0 resume
   juju run --unit ovn-chassis/0 'systemctl restart ovs-vswitchd'

Documentation updates
---------------------

Upgrading charms
----------------

Upgrading charms will making available new features and bug fixes. However, the
latest stable charm revision should also be used prior to making any
topological changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, or series
upgrades. Bug reports should also be filed against the most recent revision.

Note that charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For
instructions on performing the different upgrade types see `Upgrades overview`_
in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_.

.. LINKS
.. _Charms: openstack-charms.html
.. _21.04 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/21.04
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _Release schedule: release-schedule.html
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/upgrade-overview.html
.. _vault charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/src/branch/master/src/README.md#unseal-vault
.. _hacluster charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/src/branch/master/README.md#update-ring-action
.. _Cinder volume type: https://docs.openstack.org/cinder/latest/contributor/replication.html#volume-types-extra-specs
.. _Cinder-Ceph replication development notes: https://github.com/ionutbalutoiu/cinder-ceph-replication
.. _MicroStack: https://microstack.run
.. _openstack-on-lxd: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/openstack-on-lxd
.. _Migration from Neutron ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-ovn.html#migration-from-neutron-ml2-ovs-to-ml2-ovn
.. _What is STONITH?: https://clusterlabs.org/pacemaker/doc/en-US/Pacemaker/1.1/html/Clusters_from_Scratch/ch08.html

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1890106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1890106
.. _LP #1886083: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1886083
.. _LP #1884548: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1884548
.. _LP #1827690: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-barbican/+bug/1827690
.. _LP #1904199: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-iscsi/+bug/1904199
.. _LP #1912638: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-rabbitmq-server/+bug/1912638
.. _LP #1881114: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-hacluster/+bug/1881114
.. _LP #1899104: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/barbican/+bug/1899104
.. _LP #1896630: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-layer-ovn/+bug/1896630
.. _LP #1896603: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/ovn-octavia-provider/+bug/1896603
.. _LP #1914819: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-glance/+bug/1914819
.. _LP #1852221: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/openvswitch/+bug/1852221
