.. _release_notes_19.07:

=====
19.07
=====

Summary
=======

The 19.07 OpenStack Charm release includes updates for the following charms.
Additional charm support status information is published in the main
:doc:`charm guide <../project/openstack-charms>` which ultimately supersedes
release note contents.

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or bug
reports.

Supported Charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* aodh
* barbican
* barbican-vault
* ceilometer
* ceilometer-agent
* ceph-mon
* ceph-osd
* ceph-proxy
* ceph-radosgw
* ceph-rbd-mirror
* cinder
* cinder-ceph
* designate
* designate-bind
* glance
* gnocchi
* hacluster
* heat
* keystone
* keystone-ldap
* lxd
* neutron-api
* neutron-openvswitch
* neutron-gateway
* neutron-dynamic-routing
* nova-cloud-controller
* nova-compute
* octavia
* octavia-diskimage-retrofit
* openstack-dashboard
* percona-cluster
* rabbitmq-server
* swift-proxy
* swift-storage
* vault

Preview Charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* barbican-softhsm
* ceph-fs
* cinder-backup
* keystone-saml-mellon
* manila
* manila-generic
* masakari
* masakari-monitors
* pacemaker-remote
* tempest

Removed Charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following charms have been removed as part of this charm release:

* nova-lxd

New Charm Features
==================

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of
a test bundle, and/or a `charm deployment guide <https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/>`__
section which details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
src/tests/bundles/ directory within the relevant charm repository.

Percona Cluster Cold Start
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The percona-cluster charm now contains new logic and actions to assist with
operational tasks surrounding an unexpected database cluster shutdown.
Human interaction is still required to recover the cluster.

For more information about the introduced improvements refer to the "Cold Boot"
section in the `charm documentation <https://charmhub.io/percona-cluster>`__.

DVR SNAT
~~~~~~~~

The neutron-openvswitch charm now supports deployment of DVR based routers
with combined SNAT functionality, removing the need to use the neutron-gateway
charm in some types of deployment.

This implicitly requires that 'external' networks are routable to all
hypervisors within the deployment to allow effective load balancing of
SNAT routers and DVR services across a deployment.

For more details refer to the documentation of the ``use-dvr-snat``
configuration option of the `neutron-openvswitch <https://charmhub.io/neutron-openvswitch>`__ charm

Octavia Image Lifecycle Management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release introduces the octavia-diskimage-retrofit charm which provides
a tool for retro-fitting cloud images for use as Octavia Amphora.

For more information about the octavia-diskimage-retrofit charm refer to the
`charm home page <https://charmhub.io/octavia-diskimage-retrofit/>`__ and the
`charm deployment guide <https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/networking/load-balancing.html#amphora-image>`__.

Nova Live Migration: Streamline SSH Host Key Handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Nova compute service uses direct (machine-to-machine) SSH connections to
perform instance migrations. Each compute host must therefore be in possession
of every other compute host's SSH host key via the knownhosts file.

This release of the nova-cloud-controller charm has improved the host key
discovery and distribution algorithm, the net effect being that the addition of
a nova-compute unit will be faster than before and the nova-cloud-controller
upgrade-charm hook will be significantly improved for large deployments.

For more information about the cache-known-hosts option refer to the
`charm-config-cache-known-hosts
<https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cloud-controller/src/branch/master/README.md#ssh-host-lookup-caching>`__
section of the nova-cloud-controller charm README.

Preview Charm Features
======================

Vault-Keystone Cross-Model Relations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The vault and keystone charms now support use of the identity-service and
vault-kv interface types when using cross model relations.

Upgrading charms
================

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, charm application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug reports.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
'upgrade-charm' command, for example:

.. code:: bash

    juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are two distinctly different things.
Charm upgrades ensure that the deployment is using the latest charm
revision, containing the latest charm fixes and charm features available
for a given deployment.

Charm upgrades do not cause OpenStack versions to upgrade, however OpenStack
upgrades do require the latest Charm version as pre-requisite.

Upgrading OpenStack
===================

Before upgrading OpenStack, all OpenStack Charms should be running the latest
stable charm revision.

.. note::

   Upgrading an OpenStack cloud is not without risk; upgrades should be tested
   in pre-production testing environments prior to production deployment
   upgrades.

See the `charm deployment guide <https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/openstack.html>`__
for more details.

Series Upgrade Issues
=====================

Bug: #1839021: hacluster charm "Resource; res_ks_haproxy not running"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For an HA deployment, when performing a Trusty to Xenial upgrade, it's
possible, if the keystone unit takes a long time to reboot and restart its
service, that keystone's hacluster crm monitor may exhaust its retries and
show a ``blocked`` state with the status message ``Resource: res_ks_haproxy not
running``.

In this case, running the following against the affected hacluster unit should
resolve the issue once the associated keystone unit has completed its upgrade:

.. code:: bash

   juju run --unit <unit> sudo crm resource refresh

where ``<unit>`` is (say) keystone/0.

Deprecation Notices
===================

Nova LXD Charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Accordant with the `retirement of the nova compute driver for lxd <https://opendev.org/x/nova-lxd/>`__,
the nova-lxd charm has been deprecated with this release. Git repos and branches,
as well as charm store historical revisions remain in place for community efforts
and existing users. The OpenStack Charms team will no longer focus on backports
or bug fixes to the nova lxd driver or the corresponding charm.

Removed Features
================

Percona-Cluster Charm Trusty Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Percona-Cluster Charm has dropped support for Trusty. This, and future
releases of the Percona-Cluster Charm will no longer support Trusty. The
git branches and charm store revisions remain in place for those who need to
remain on Trusty for this database charm.

The main driver for this decision was the lack of a Python 3.4 mysqldb module
on 14.04. With the widespread upstream and distro Python3-only efforts well
underway, the Percona-Cluster charm now supports (and requires) a Python3-only
runtime.

Known Issues
============

Masakari and Masakari Monitors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both Masakari charms remain as previews. Bugs `1728527 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari-monitors/+bug/1728527>`__
and `1839715 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari/+bug/1839715>`__ are both
in progress and need to land for a successful Instance HA deployment.

Octavia Load Balancer in conjunction with DVR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are currently a few outstanding upstream issues with connecting a Octavia
loadbalancer to the outside world through a Floating IP when used in
conjunction with Neutron DVR.  As such, use of Octavia with DVR is
not currently recommended.

Although there are some fixes provided in the referenced material, the
current implementation still show issues and appears to limit how we can
model a DVR deployment.

An approach to work around this is to create a separate non-distributed
network for hosting the load balancer VIP and connecting it to a FIP.

The payload- and loadbalancer- instances can stay in a distributed
network, only the VIP must be in a non-distributed network.
(although the actual hosting of said router can be on a compute host
acting as a "centralized" snat router in a DVR deployment.)

For more information refer to the following pages:

* https://www.openstack.org/assets/presentation-media/Neutron-Port-Binding-and-Impact-of-unbound-ports-on-DVR-Routers-with-FloatingIP.pdf
* https://bugs.launchpad.net/neutron/+bug/1583694
* https://bugs.launchpad.net/neutron/+bug/1667877
* https://review.opendev.org/#/c/437970/
* https://review.opendev.org/#/c/437986/
* https://review.opendev.org/#/c/466434/

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Designate charm at Ocata and earlier OpenStack releases does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.

* https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019

Bugs Fixed
==========

This release includes 48 bug fixes.

For the full list of bugs resolved for the 19.07 charms release please refer
to `Launchpad <https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/19.07>`__.

Next Release Info
=================

Please see the `charm guide <https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest>`__ for current information.
