.. _release_notes_20.02:

=====
20.02
=====

Summary
-------

The 20.02 OpenStack Charms release includes updates for the following charms.
Additional charm support status information is published in the `OpenStack
Charm Guide`_ which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or bug
reports.

Supported charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* aodh
* barbican
* barbican-vault
* ceilometer
* ceilometer-agent
* ceph-fs
* ceph-mon
* ceph-osd
* ceph-proxy
* ceph-radosgw
* ceph-rbd-mirror
* cinder
* cinder-ceph
* cinder-purestorage
* designate
* designate-bind
* glance
* gnocchi
* hacluster
* heat
* keystone
* keystone-ldap
* lxd
* manila
* manila-ganesha
* neutron-api
* neutron-openvswitch
* neutron-gateway
* neutron-dynamic-routing
* nova-cloud-controller
* nova-compute
* octavia
* octavia-dashboard
* octavia-diskimage-retrofit
* openstack-dashboard
* percona-cluster
* placement
* rabbitmq-server
* swift-proxy
* swift-storage
* vault

Preview charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* barbican-softhsm
* cinder-backup
* keystone-saml-mellon
* manila-generic
* masakari
* masakari-monitors
* mysql-innodb-cluster
* mysql-router
* neutron-api-plugin-ovn
* ovn-central
* ovn-chassis
* ovn-dedicated-chassis
* pacemaker-remote
* tempest
* watcher
* watcher-dashboard

Removed charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

n/a

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ section which
details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
``src/tests/bundles`` directory within the relevant charm repository.

Policy overrides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The policy overrides feature provides operators with a mechanism to override
policy defaults on a per-service basis.

Policy defaults for an OpenStack service are defined via "policy-in-code"
and/or via a default policy YAML file provided by the charm. The operator can
use the new feature by providing a ZIP file consisting of at least one YAML
file which contains policy rules that the service will observe when responding
to API queries. This allows operators to selectively override the default
policies of that service.

The last release (19.10) introduced the feature for a number of charms.  This
release adds the following charms:

* openstack-dashboard (Horizon)
* octavia

For further details see `Policy Overrides`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment
Guide`_.

Please consult the README for each charm to determine exactly what is provided
with respect to this feature.

Vault
~~~~~

The vault charm now supports actions ``pause`` and ``resume`` to respectively
stop and start the Vault process on units.

For further details consult appendix `Vault`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_.

Disabling snapshots as a boot source for the OpenStack dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapshots can be disabled as valid boot sources for launching instances in the
dashboard. This is done via the new ``disable-instance-snapshot`` configuration
option in the openstack-dashboard charm.  If 'true' then snapshots will not
show up in the Launch Instance modal dialog box.

This option works from the Newton release, and has no effect on earlier
OpenStack releases.

New charms
----------

CephFS, Manila, and Manila-Ganesha
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 20.02 OpenStack Charms release includes a new charm to support Ganesha
for use with Manila and CephFS. Manila and CephFS are also moving to supported
status.

.. note::

   The manila-ganesha charm only supports OpenStack releases starting at Rocky.
   Manila and CephFS are both supported back to Mitaka (on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS).

Preview charm features
----------------------

mysql-innodb-cluster and mysql-router
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 20.02 OpenStack Charms release updates two tech preview charms to deploy
MySQL 8 for OpenStack: mysql-innodb-cluster and mysql-router. Both are
available for use with Ubuntu 19.10 (Eoan).

These two charms will replace the percona-cluster charm completely in the 20.05
Charms release.

.. note::

   The MySQL 8 charms are in preview state and are ready for testing. They are
   not production-ready.

The mysql-innodb-cluster charm deploys MySQL 8 in an InnoDB cluster with a
read/write node and N number of read-only nodes. This charm does not support
single-unit or non-clustered deployments.

The mysql-router charm deploys a MySQL 8 Router which will proxy database
requests from the principle charm application to a MySQL 8 InnoDB cluster.
MySQL Router handles cluster communication and understands the cluster schema.

The mysql-router charm is deployed as a subordinate on the principle charm
application and should be named accordingly at deploy time (e.g.
<application-name>-mysql-router).

A simple example deployment:

.. code-block:: none

   juju deploy cs:keystone
   juju deploy cs:~openstack-charmers-next/mysql-router keystone-mysql-router
   juju deploy -n 3 cs:~openstack-charmers-next/mysql-innodb-cluster
   juju add-relation keystone-mysql-router:shared-db keystone:shared-db
   juju add-relation keystone-mysql-router:db-router mysql-innodb-cluster:db-router

In Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal) percona-cluster will no longer be available. The
migration process is currently under development in the charms to ease the
number of required steps. Here is a high level overview:

* Deploy mysql-innodb-cluster alongside an existing deployment
* Remove the relation between the application charm and the percona-cluster
  charm
* Dump the existing database from percona-cluster
* Import the database into mysql-innodb-cluster
* Deploy and relate an instantiation of mysql-router to the client charm
  i.e. <application-name>-mysql-router
* Relate <application-name>-mysql-router to mysql-innodb-cluster

.. important::

   Charmed OpenStack clouds upgrading their nodes to Ubuntu 20.04 LTS will need
   to migrate from the percona-cluster charm to both the mysql-router and
   mysql-innodb-cluster charms.

OVN
~~~

The 20.02 OpenStack Charms release updates the tech preview suite of charms
that allows you to model Open Virtual Network (OVN). OVN provides open source
network virtualization for Open vSwitch (OVS).

Please refer to `Open Virtual Network (OVN)`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

Swift Global Replication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As of the 20.02 charm release, with OpenStack Newton or later, support for a
global cluster in Swift is available as a tech preview. Please see
`Multi-region cluster`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ for more
information on enabling the feature.

.. warning::

   If a fork of the Swift charms is in use which has this feature enabled
   then a charm upgrade will almost certainly cause issues. This is due to
   changes in charm config options and the way the Swift init scripts are
   configured.

Watcher
~~~~~~~

The watcher charm deploys the OpenStack Watcher service, the resource
optimisation service for multi-tenant clouds. The watcher-dashboard charm
provides a dashboard plugin for use with the OpenStack dashboard (Horizon). As
of the 20.02 OpenStack Charms release these charms are available as a tech
preview.

Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, charm application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug reports.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

New bundle features
-------------------

n/a

Deprecation notices
-------------------

n/a

Upcoming change of default behaviour for Neutron API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-api charm will have a change in default behaviour when deploying
OpenStack Ussuri (or newer) with the upcoming 20.05 OpenStack Charms release
(May 2020). The value of configuration option
``manage-neutron-plugin-legacy-mode`` will change from 'True' to 'False'.

When 'True' the network management plugin is chosen via the ``neutron-plugin``
configuration option. When 'False' plugin is chosen through the deployment of a
subordinate charm and relating it to the neutron-api application.

The most prominent effect of the change is that you will need to set up a
subordinate plugin charm (and possibly associated charms) to get a functional
network service. Sample bundles will be updated to enable OVN by default. See
`Open Virtual Network (OVN)`_ in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ for
details on OVN.

This change will be made within the following upstream context:

* During the Ussuri cycle the upstream Neutron project will switch to promote
  ML2+OVN as its default reference implementation, replacing the traditional
  ML2+OVS and ML2+OVS+DVR implementations. See the
  `Toward Convergence of ML2+OVS+DVR and OVN`_ Neutron specification for more
  information.

* The desire for a more sensible default mode of operation enabling easier
  integration with the rich plugin ecosystem available for OpenStack Neutron.

Upgrading neutron-api or upgrading OpenStack will not trigger the new
behaviour. Documentation on migrating existing clouds to OVN will be provided.

Removed features
----------------

n/a

Known issues
------------

Swift-Proxy and Policy.d overrides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The is no policy.d override mechanism available for Swift (and, therefore, the
swift-proxy charm) as Swift does not use the ``oslo.policy`` library.  Swift
uses its own authentication system that connects with Keystone and validates
according to Swift's own configuration files.  The ``operator-roles``
configuration option allows the operator to control which Swift operator roles
will be authenticated, as usual. See the `Swift Auth System`_ for further
details.

Masakari and Masakari Monitors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both Masakari charms remain as previews. Bugs `LP #1728527`_ and `LP #1839715`_
need to be resolved in order to arrive at a successful instance HA deployment.
Bug `LP #1773765`_ is likely to affect on-going support of a Masakari
deployment.

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deploying the glance-simplestreams-sync charm on Bionic a more recent
version of the simplestreams package must be installed by configuring a PPA:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config glance-simplestreams-sync source=ppa:simplestreams-dev/trunk

See bug `LP #1790904`_ for details.

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack releases Pike and earlier does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.

Restart Nova services after adding certificates relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A race condition exists with the use of the 'certificates' relation. When SSL
certificates are issued Nova services may attempt to talk to the placement API
over HTTP while the API has already changed to HTTPS. See bug `LP #1826382`_.

To mitigate against this, restart the nova-compute and nova-scheduler services
once certificates have been issued:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application nova-compute "systemctl restart nova-compute"
   juju run --application nova-cloud-controller "systemctl restart nova-scheduler"

Bugs fixed
----------

The 20.02 OpenStack Charms release includes 53 bug fixes. Refer to the `20.02
milestone`_ in Launchpad for the list of resolved bugs.

Next release info
-----------------

Please see the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ for current information.

.. LINKS
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/openstack.html
.. _Open Virtual Network (OVN): https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/networking/ovn/index.html
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _20.02 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.02
.. _Policy Overrides: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/policy-overrides.html
.. _Neutron documentation: https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/admin/config-fip-port-forwardings.html
.. _placement API: https://docs.openstack.org/placement/ussuri/
.. _HA with pause/resume: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/openstack.html#paused-single-unit
.. _Swift Auth system: https://docs.openstack.org/swift/latest/overview_auth.html
.. _Multi-region cluster: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/storage/swift.html#multi-region-cluster
.. _Toward Convergence of ML2+OVS+DVR and OVN: http://specs.openstack.org/openstack/neutron-specs/specs/ussuri/ml2ovs-ovn-convergence.html
.. _vault charm: https://charmhub.io/vault

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1728527: https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari-monitors/+bug/1728527
.. _LP #1773765: https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari/+bug/1773765
.. _LP #1790904: https://bugs.launchpad.net/simplestreams/+bug/1790904
.. _LP #1826382: https://bugs.launchpad.net/nova/+bug/1826382
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1839715: https://bugs.launchpad.net/masakari/+bug/1839715
