.. _release_notes_20.08:

=====
20.08
=====

Summary
-------

The 20.08 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the charms
described in the following sections. Refer to the `20.08 milestone`_ in
Launchpad for the list of resolved bugs and see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule` for past and future releases.

Additional charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

OpenStack charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
meet the requirements of payload project health, payload packaging,
upgradability, charm test gates, and the general release guidelines of the
OpenStack Charms project.

* `aodh <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-aodh/>`_
* `barbican <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican/>`_
* `barbican-vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-vault/>`_
* `ceilometer <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer/>`_
* `ceilometer-agent <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceilometer-agent/>`_
* `cinder <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder/>`_
* `cinder-backup <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup/>`_
* `cinder-backup-swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/>`_
* `cinder-ceph <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-ceph/>`_
* `designate <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate/>`_
* `glance <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance/>`_
* `heat <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-heat/>`_
* `keystone <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone/>`_
* `keystone-kerberos <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-kerberos/>`_
* `keystone-ldap <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-ldap/>`_
* `keystone-saml-mellon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-saml-mellon/>`_
* `manila <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila/>`_
* `manila-ganesha <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-ganesha/>`_
* `masakari <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari/>`_
* `masakari-monitors <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-masakari-monitors/>`_
* `mysql-innodb-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-innodb-cluster>`_
* `mysql-router <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-mysql-router>`_
* `neutron-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api/>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-arista <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista>`_
* `neutron-api-plugin-ovn <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-ovn>`_
* `neutron-dynamic-routing <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-dynamic-routing/>`_
* `neutron-gateway <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-gateway/>`_
* `neutron-openvswitch <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-neutron-openvswitch/>`_
* `nova-cell-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cell-controller/>`_
* `nova-cloud-controller <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-cloud-controller/>`_
* `nova-compute <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/>`_
* `octavia <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia/>`_
* `octavia-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-dashboard/>`_
* `octavia-diskimage-retrofit <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-octavia-diskimage-retrofit/>`_
* `openstack-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-openstack-dashboard/>`_
* `placement <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-placement>`_
* `swift-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-proxy/>`_
* `swift-storage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-swift-storage/>`_

Other supporting charms (Stable)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms have stable releases with ongoing maintenance and testing. They
are classified differently because the payload of each is not technically an
OpenStack project.

* `ceph-fs <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-fs/>`_
* `ceph-mon <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-mon/>`_
* `ceph-osd <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-osd/>`_
* `ceph-proxy <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-proxy/>`_
* `ceph-radosgw <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-radosgw/>`_
* `ceph-rbd-mirror <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/>`_
* `cinder-purestorage <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-purestorage/>`_
* `designate-bind <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-designate-bind/>`_
* `glance-simplestreams-sync <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-glance-simplestreams-sync/>`_
* `gnocchi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-gnocchi/>`_
* `hacluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/>`_
* `ovn-central <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-central>`_
* `ovn-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-chassis>`_
* `ovn-dedicated-chassis <https://opendev.org/x/charm-ovn-dedicated-chassis>`_
* `pacemaker-remote <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-pacemaker-remote/>`_
* `percona-cluster <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-percona-cluster/>`_
* `rabbitmq-server <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-rabbitmq-server/>`_
* `vault <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/>`_
* `trilio-data-mover <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-data-mover/>`_
* `trilio-dm-api <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-dm-api/>`_
* `trilio-horizon-plugin <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-horizon-plugin/>`_
* `trilio-wlm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-trilio-wlm/>`_

Tech-preview charms (Beta)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms do not have stable releases, even though they may technically have
"stable/yy.mm" branches. Regardless of any maintenance and testing that these
charms may receive, some work (major bugs, payload packaging issues, project
issues, general QA) is still required before the charms are ready for
production use (promoted to Stable).

* `ceph-iscsi <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-ceph-iscsi/>`_

Alpha charms (Edge)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This classification of charms includes those which may be a proof-of-concept, a
test fixture, or one which is in active development. They are not intended to
be used in production. Supportability, upgradability, testability may be
lacking, either from a charm perspective, or from the workload package
perspective.

* `barbican-softhsm <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-barbican-softhsm/>`_
* `manila-generic <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-generic/>`_
* `tempest <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-tempest/>`_
* `watcher <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher/>`_
* `watcher-dashboard <https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-watcher-dashboard/>`_

Maintenance-mode charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These charms are in maintenance mode, meaning that new features and new
releases are not actively being added or tested with them. Generally, these
were produced for a demo, PoC, or as an example.

* None at this time.

Removed charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

n/a

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ section which
details the use of the feature. For example test bundles, see the
``src/tests/bundles`` directory within the relevant charm repository.

Charm cinder-ceph now requires 'ceph-access' relation to charm nova-compute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When both the nova-compute and cinder-ceph applications are deployed a new
relation is now required. In this context, if the 'ceph-access' relation
endpoint is not present between cinder-ceph and nova-compute the latter charm
will go into the blocked state. This should not affect most currently deployed
clouds, but it will affect new deployments. See commit `Require relation to
nova-compute application`_ for details.

To add the relation:

.. code-block:: none

   juju add-relation nova-compute:ceph-access cinder-ceph:ceph-access

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The glance-simplestreams-sync charm now installs simplestreams as a snap. As
such it no longer has a ``source`` configuration option (the new
``snap-channel`` option is used to select a channel in the Snap store).

There is now a Juju action to perform a one-time sync of images:
``sync-images``.

Gnocchi S3 support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The gnocchi charm can now be configured to use S3 as a storage backend. By
default it uses Ceph. For more details see the `gnocchi charm README`_.

.. note::

   S3 storage support for Gnocchi is available starting with OpenStack Stein.

Keystone Kerberos support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new keystone-kerberos subordinate charm can be used to add Kerberos
support to Keystone by authenticating to an OpenStack domain. An external
Kerberos server is needed. For more details see the `keystone-kerberos charm
README`_.

.. note::

   Keystone Kerberos is supported starting with OpenStack Queens.

MySQL InnoDB Cluster TLS communication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TLS communication between MySQL InnoDB Cluster and its cloud clients is now
supported. Previously, TLS was only enabled for inter-MySQL client
communication by way of a self-signed certificate.

Due to the circular dependency between the vault and mysql-innodb-cluster
applications, the enablement of this feature can only be done post-deployment
(once vault has been initialised and has a root Certificate Authority).

Database TLS communication is enabled with this relation:

.. code-block:: none

   juju add-relation mysql-innodb-cluster:certificates vault:certificates

New charms
----------

Arista
~~~~~~

The neutron-api-plugin-arista charm is now an officially supported charm.

.. note::

   For now the neutron-api-plugin-arista charm is only supported up to
   OpenStack Queens. The ongoing work for supporting other releases is tracked
   in `LP #1890628`_.

This subordinate charm provides the Arista ML2 Plugin support to the OpenStack
Neutron API service.

When this charm is related to the neutron-api charm it will install the Arista
Neutron packages on each neutron-api unit in the region and supply the desired
configuration to the neutron-api service.

For more details see the `neutron-api-plugin-arista charm README`_.

For upgrading from earlier prototypes see `Upgrading to stable Arista charm`_.

Trilio charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The trilio-data-mover, trilio-dm-api, trilio-horizon-plugin, and trilio-wlm
charms are now officially supported. These charms deploy TrilioVault, a
commercial snapshot and restore solution for OpenStack. For details see the
`TrilioVault Data Protection`_ section of the `OpenStack Charms Deployment
Guide`_.

.. note::

   The Trilio charms are currently only supported on Ubuntu 18.04 LTS (Bionic).

Preview charm features
----------------------

Deprecation notices
-------------------

ceph-osd charm ``autotune`` option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``autotune`` configuration option for the ceph-osd charm is deprecated and
will be removed in the 20.10 release of OpenStack Charms. See bug `LP
#1798794`_ for a full discussion.

glance-simplestreams-sync charm ``use_swift`` option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``use_swift`` configuration option for the glance-simplestreams-sync charm
is deprecated and will be removed in the 20.10 release of OpenStack Charms.

This option allowed simplestreams metadata to be hosted on an Apache server
local to a glance-simplestreams-sync unit. Object storage will become the only
way to store this metadata.

Removed features
----------------

Glance Simplestreams Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The glance-simplestreams-sync charm no longer supports deployment with the
rabbitmq-server charm. Bundles which specify this relation will need to be
updated.

To prevent possible race conditions during the deployment of a cloud, the
behaviour of enabling synchronisation via Cron by default has changed. You will
now need to manually enable this feature (via the ``run`` configuration
option):

.. code-block:: none

   juju config glance-simplestreams-sync run=true

Known issues
------------

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack releases Pike and earlier does not yet
support SSL via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_.

Current versions of OpenStack with Vault and the certificates relation are
supported by the Designate charm.

Restart Nova services after adding certificates relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A race condition exists with the use of the 'certificates' relation. When SSL
certificates are issued Nova services may attempt to talk to the placement API
over HTTP while the API has already changed to HTTPS. See bug `LP #1826382`_.

To mitigate against this, restart the nova-compute and nova-scheduler services
once certificates have been issued:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run --application nova-compute "systemctl restart nova-compute"
   juju run --application nova-cloud-controller "systemctl restart nova-scheduler"

TrilioVault Data Mover charm upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For deployments using prior versions of the trilio-data-mover charm (as
provided by Trilio) the relation between the trilio-data-mover charm and
rabbitmq-server must be removed and re-added to ensure that specific access for
the data-mover service is provided for RabbitMQ.

.. code-block:: none

   juju remove-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server
   juju add-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server

TrilioVault File Recovery Manager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mounting snapshots using the File Recovery Manager appliance fails due to
permissions errors encountered during the libvirt/qemu snapshot mount process
on compute nodes. See bug `LP #1888389`_ for details.

Octavia and neutron-openvswitch in LXD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The octavia charm requires a neutron-openvswitch subordinate which means that
if it runs in a container, the openvswitch kernel module must be loaded before
the container starts. Module loading is done by LXD based on the profile
applied by Juju and taken from the neutron-openvswitch charm. However, due to a
combination of bugs (`LP #1876849`_ in Juju and `LP #1906280`_ in the
ovn-chassis/neutron-openvswitch charms) there is no guarantee that the profile
will be applied before neutron-openvswitch (or ovn-chassis) execution starts in
a container.

The issue is more likely to happen on disaggregated deployments where octavia
units run in LXD containers on machines that do not have any units of
neutron-openvswitch running on bare metal.

In order to work around the error an operator needs to make sure the
``openswitch`` module is loaded on the host and then restart the
``openvswitch-switch.service`` service inside the LXD container where the
respective neutron-openvswitch unit is present. After that the unit error can
be resolved.

OpenStack os-brick, Ceph Octopus, and Focal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ceph RBD Mirror and Cinder Backup Swift Proxy charms do not work with Ceph
Octopus due to an issue with the upstream OpenStack os-brick library (see bug
`LP #1865754`_). As Octopus is the default Ceph version on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
(Focal) these charms cannot be used on Focal until the issue is resolved. Here
are the resulting charm-specific behaviours:

* ceph-rbd-mirror charm: The charm will enter a blocked state after configuring
  pool mirroring (see bug `LP #1879749`_).
* cinder-backup-swift-proxy charm: If a backup volume operation is performed
  the resulting volume will be in error (see bug `LP #1890821`_).

Rabbitmq Scale-Out
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 20.08 OpenStack Charms release contains a fix to bug `LP #1796886`_ which
is a bug relating to scaling-out rabbitmq-server. Please upgrade the
rabbitmq-server charm and all charms with an amqp relation before scaling-out
rabbitmq-server.

Series upgrade - percona-cluster and vault charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

percona-cluster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

During a series upgrade from Xenial (16.04) to Bionic (18.04) the
percona-cluster charm may fail during the ``post-series-upgrade`` hook. This
appears to be because the percona-cluster charm may erroneously delete the file
``/var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded`` (see bug `LP #1868326`_). If this
occurs, then executing the following commands on the failed unit will recover
the hook and allow it to complete the series upgrade:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run percona-cluster/N 'echo "done" > /var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded'
   juju resolved percona-cluster/N

This may be required for each percona-cluster unit.

vault
^^^^^

If a series upgrade is attempted while Vault is sealed then manual intervention
will be required (see bugs `LP #1886083`_ and `LP #1890106`_). The vault leader
unit (which will be in error) will need to be unsealed and the hook error
resolved. The `vault charm`_ documentation includes unsealing instructions, and
the hook error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved vault/N

Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug report filing.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

.. LINKS
.. _20.08 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.08
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _neutron-api-plugin-arista charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista/blob/master/README.md
.. _Upgrading to stable Arista charm: https://github.com/openstack/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista/blob/master/docs/upgrading-to-stable.md
.. _gnocchi charm README: https://github.com/openstack/charm-gnocchi/blob/master/src/README.md
.. _keystone-kerberos charm README: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-keystone-kerberos/src/branch/master/src/README.md
.. _vault charm: https://charmhub.io/vault
.. _TrilioVault Data Protection: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-trilio-vault.html

.. COMMITS
.. _Require relation to nova-compute application: https://review.opendev.org/#/c/731437/

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1826382: https://bugs.launchpad.net/nova/+bug/1826382
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1876849: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-openvswitch/+bug/1876849
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1890628: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista/+bug/1890628
.. _LP #1798794: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-osd/+bug/1798794
.. _LP #1868326: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-percona-cluster/+bug/1868326
.. _LP #1890106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1890106
.. _LP #1886083: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1886083
.. _LP #1888389: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-trilio-data-mover/+bug/1888389
.. _LP #1865754: https://bugs.launchpad.net/tripleo/+bug/1865754
.. _LP #1890821: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/+bug/1890821
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1796886: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-rabbitmq-server/+bug/1796886
.. _LP #1906280: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ovn-chassis/+bug/1906280
