.. _release_notes_20.10:

=====
20.10
=====

Summary
-------

The 20.10 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the charms
described on the :doc:`charm guide <../project/openstack-charms>` page. As of
this release, the project consists of 60 supported (stable) charms.

For the list of bugs resolved in this release refer to the `20.10 milestone`_
in Launchpad.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule`.

General charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_, that
details its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles``
directory of the relevant charm repository.

OpenStack Victoria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The charms now support OpenStack Victoria on Ubuntu 20.10 (natively) and Ubuntu
20.04 LTS (via UCA).

Gnocchi and external root CA for S3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The gnocchi charm now supports an additional configuration option:
``trusted-external-ca-cert``. This option installs and configures an external
root CA in the gnocchi units. This is useful when an encrypted S3 (storage
backend) endpoint uses certificates that are not managed by Vault.

Arista - Supported releases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-api-plugin-arista charm now supports all OpenStack releases
starting with Queens. See bug `LP #1890628`_ for more details.

Neutron Gateway and additional data on ports and bridges
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-gateway charm now marks the openvswitch ports and bridges it
creates as managed by the charm. It does so by setting an ``external-id`` on
them. See the `Open vSwitch Integration Guide for Centralized Control`_ for
details.

Even the ports and bridges created before upgrading to this release will be
marked. Marking our ports and bridges will allow us to implement some cleanup
mechanism without risking removing too much.

See bug `LP #1809190`_ for details.

cinder charm: Allow specifying the default_volume type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new feature has been added to allow setting the default volume type, via the
new configuration parameter ``default-volume-type``, for new volumes if one is
not specified at creation time. This is to support scenarios where multiple
storage backends are to be used with cinder. Please see related bug `LP
#1884548`_ for more details and consult the cinder charm.

Action based migration from Neutron ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

New actions have been introduced to enable migration of a Neutron ML2+OVS
based deployment to ML2+OVN.

Please refer to the :doc:`../project/procedures/ovn-migration` page for more
information.

Ceph BlueStore compression support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Charms that allow for the configuration of Ceph storage can now optionally
enable Ceph BlueStore compression for the pools they manage. These are:

* ceph-fs
* ceph-radosgw
* cinder-ceph
* glance
* gnocchi
* nova-compute

Configuration options have also been added to the ceph-osd charm which allow
overriding compression settings for the deployment as a whole.

Please refer to individual charm documentation for a description of the
configuration options.

New charms
----------

ceph-iscsi
~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-iscsi charm is now a supported charm. This charm implements the Ceph
iSCSI gateway, which provides iSCSI targets backed by a Ceph cluster.

Preview charm features
----------------------

n/a

Deprecation notices
-------------------

ceph-radosgw charm: Deprecate the pool-prefix config option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``pool-prefix`` configuration option for the ceph-radosgw charm is
deprecated and will be removed. See bug `LP #1856106`_ for a full discussion.

Octavia: Spares pool support is deprecated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Spares pool support is deprecated upstream, pending removal in the X release.
The charm will retain support for the feature for OpenStack releases up until
the X release. Please refer to `Octavia deprecation notes for Victoria`_ for
more information.

Removed features
----------------

Neutron Gateway and network bridges
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neutron-gateway charm no longer supports adding a Linux bridge to an
openvswitch bridge. This ability was dependent upon the veth peer links feature
of NetworkManager (a.k.a. ifupdown). Yet starting with Ubuntu 18.04 LTS
(Bionic) ifupdown has been replaced by Netplan, which has a feature gap in this
area (see bug `LP #1876730`_).

Using ifupdown on Bionic also causes issues with LXD containers (see bug `LP
#1877594`_). The latter issue has details on migrating away from veth peer
links.

Removed charms
--------------

n/a

Known issues
------------

Barbican DB migration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With Focal Ussuri, running command ``barbican-manage db upgrade`` against a
barbican application that is backed by a MySQL InnoDB Cluster will lead to a
failure (see bug `LP #1899104`_). This was discovered while resolving bug `LP
#1827690`_.

Both the charm bug `LP #1827690`_ and the package bug `LP #1899104`_ are known
issues that will be addressed shortly after the 20.10 release.

The package bug only affects Focal Ussuri and is not present in Victoria, nor
is it present when using (Bionic) Percona Cluster as the back-end DB.

Designate and Vault at Ocata and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate charm for OpenStack Ocata (and earlier) does not yet support SSL
via Vault and the certificates relation. See bug `LP #1839019`_. The charm
works as intended in this scenario starting with OpenStack Pike.

IP SAN sym links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using the vault certificates relation and vault is configured with
``auto-generate-root-ca-cert`` set to True (and/or the deprecated setting,
``totally-unsecure-auto-unlock`` set to true) some charms may be susceptible to
bug `LP #1893847`_.

The symptom is missing sym links to certificates for Subject Alternative Name
(SAN) IP addresses. For example, for Virtual IP (VIP) addresses for services.
Apache configuration may fail as it will point to a certificate for the VIP(s).

The workaround is to set the above settings to False and utilise the
post-deployment actions for preparing vault as documented in the `vault
charm`_.

TrilioVault Data Mover charm upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For deployments using prior versions of the trilio-data-mover charm (as
provided by Trilio) the relation between the trilio-data-mover charm and
rabbitmq-server must be removed and re-added to ensure that specific access for
the data-mover service is provided for RabbitMQ.

.. code-block:: none

   juju remove-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server
   juju add-relation trilio-data-mover rabbitmq-server

TrilioVault File Recovery Manager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mounting snapshots using the File Recovery Manager appliance fails due to
permissions errors encountered during the libvirt/qemu snapshot mount process
on compute nodes. See bug `LP #1888389`_ for details.

Octavia and neutron-openvswitch in LXD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The octavia charm requires a neutron-openvswitch subordinate which means that
if it runs in a container, the openvswitch kernel module must be loaded before
the container starts. Module loading is done by LXD based on the profile
applied by Juju and taken from the neutron-openvswitch charm. However, due to a
combination of bugs (`LP #1876849`_ in Juju and `LP #1906280`_ in the
ovn-chassis/neutron-openvswitch charms) there is no guarantee that the profile
will be applied before neutron-openvswitch (or ovn-chassis) execution starts in
a container.

The issue is more likely to happen on disaggregated deployments where octavia
units run in LXD containers on machines that do not have any units of
neutron-openvswitch running on bare metal.

In order to work around the error an operator needs to make sure the
``openswitch`` module is loaded on the host and then restart the
``openvswitch-switch.service`` service inside the LXD container where the
respective neutron-openvswitch unit is present. After that the unit error can
be resolved.

OpenStack os-brick, Ceph Octopus, and Focal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ceph RBD Mirror and Cinder Backup Swift Proxy charms do not work with Ceph
Octopus due to an issue with the upstream OpenStack os-brick library (see
bug `LP #1865754`_). As Octopus is the default Ceph version on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
(Focal) these charms cannot be used on Focal until the issue is resolved. Here
are the resulting charm-specific behaviours:

* ceph-rbd-mirror charm: The charm will enter a blocked state after configuring
  pool mirroring (see bug `LP #1879749`_).
* cinder-backup-swift-proxy charm: If a backup volume operation is performed
  the resulting volume will be in error (see bug `LP #1890821`_).

Series upgrade - percona-cluster and vault charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

percona-cluster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

During a series upgrade from Xenial (16.04) to Bionic (18.04) the
percona-cluster charm may fail during the ``post-series-upgrade`` hook. This
appears to be because the percona-cluster charm may erroneously delete the file
``/var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded`` (see bug `LP #1868326`_). If this
occurs, then executing the following commands on the failed unit will recover
the hook and allow it to complete the series upgrade:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run percona-cluster/N 'echo "done" > /var/lib/percona-xtradb-cluster/seeded'
   juju resolved percona-cluster/N

This may be required for each percona-cluster unit.

vault
^^^^^

If a series upgrade is attempted while Vault is sealed then manual intervention
will be required (see bugs `LP #1886083`_ and `LP #1890106`_). The vault leader
unit (which will be in error) will need to be unsealed and the hook error
resolved. The `vault charm`_ documentation includes unsealing instructions, and
the hook error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved vault/N

Upgrading charms
----------------

Always use the latest stable charm revision before proceeding with topological
changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, series upgrades, or
bug report filing.

Please ensure that the keystone charm is upgraded first.

To upgrade an existing deployment to the latest charm version simply use the
:command:`upgrade-charm` command. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju upgrade-charm keystone

Charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. Charm
upgrades ensure that the deployment has the latest charm revision, containing
the latest charm fixes and features, whereas OpenStack upgrades influence the
software package versions of OpenStack itself.

A charm upgrade does not trigger an OpenStack upgrade. An OpenStack upgrade is
a separate process. However, an OpenStack upgrade does require the latest charm
revision. Please refer to `OpenStack upgrades`_ in the `OpenStack Charms
Deployment Guide`_ for more details.

.. LINKS
.. _20.10 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/20.10
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _OpenStack upgrades: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-upgrade-openstack.html
.. _Open vSwitch Integration Guide for Centralized Control: https://docs.openvswitch.org/en/latest/topics/integration/
.. _vault charm: https://charmhub.io/vault
.. _Octavia deprecation notes for Victoria: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/victoria.html#deprecation-notes

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1809190: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-gateway/+bug/1809190
.. _LP #1839019: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-designate/+bug/1839019
.. _LP #1876849: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-openvswitch/+bug/1876849
.. _LP #1877594: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-gateway/+bug/1877594
.. _LP #1876730: https://bugs.launchpad.net/netplan/+bug/1876730
.. _LP #1890628: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-neutron-api-plugin-arista/+bug/1890628
.. _LP #1868326: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-percona-cluster/+bug/1868326
.. _LP #1890106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1890106
.. _LP #1886083: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1886083
.. _LP #1888389: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-trilio-data-mover/+bug/1888389
.. _LP #1865754: https://bugs.launchpad.net/tripleo/+bug/1865754
.. _LP #1890821: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder-backup-swift-proxy/+bug/1890821
.. _LP #1879749: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-rbd-mirror/+bug/1879749
.. _LP #1884548: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1884548
.. _LP #1856106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-radosgw/+bug/1856106
.. _LP #1827690: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-barbican/+bug/1827690
.. _LP #1899104: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/barbican/+bug/1899104
.. _LP #1893847: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-helpers/+bug/1893847
.. _LP #1906280: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ovn-chassis/+bug/1906280
