===========================================
2023.2 (Bobcat) (under development)
===========================================

The 2023.2 (Bobcat) OpenStack Charms release includes updates for the charms
described on the :doc:`../project/openstack-charms` page. As of this release,
the project consists of 62 stable charms.

.. note::

   This release corresponds to a non-SLURP (upstream OpenStack) release and
   will consequently only be supported until July 2024.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule`.

.. note::

   Release notes contents is superseded by updated information published in the
   :doc:`index` (this guide) after the release of any given OpenStack Charms
   version.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Note that charm upgrades and
   OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For instructions on
   performing the different upgrade types see the
   :doc:`../admin/upgrades/overview` page.

.. contents:: Summary of changes:
   :local:
   :depth: 2
   :backlinks: top

New stable charms
-----------------

watcher
~~~~~~~

The `watcher charm`_ enables the OpenStack Watcher service. The watcher charm
provides a flexible and scalable resource optimization service for multi-tenant
OpenStack-based clouds. A how-to is available at:
:doc:`../admin/compute/watcher`.

watcher-dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `watcher-dashboard charm` provides the `Watcher Dashboard plugin`_ for use
with the `openstack-dashboard charm`_.

Usage example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju deploy --channel 2023.2/stable openstack-dashboard
   juju deploy --channel 2023.2/stable watcher-dashboard
   juju integrate openstack-dashboard:dashboard-plugin watcher-dashboard:dashboard

New stable charm features
-------------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the current guide (Charm Guide) that details
its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles`` directory of
the relevant charm repository (see all `charm repositories`_).

Keystone role cache config
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The keystone charm now supports configuring the Keystone ``[role] cache_time``
option using a new ``role-cache-expiration`` charm configuration option. If not
set, this defaults to the global ``expiration_time`` (configurable by the
``dogpile-cache-expiration`` charm configuration option). Setting
``cache_time`` to around 10 (seconds) is recommended for clouds that receive
frequent role assignment changes and that are therefore sensitive to the
(default) 600s delay that assignments can take to propagate to all Keystone
peer caches.

For example, to set the role cache expiration time to 10 seconds do:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config keystone role-cache-expiration=10

Designate-bind allow transfer config
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The designate-bind charm now supports configuring the BIND9 ``allow-transfer``
option. If not set, the corresponding feature is disabled.

For example, to set ``allow-transfer`` to ``10.0.0.0/8`` and ``172.16.0.0/16``:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config designate-bind allow_transfer_nets="10.0.0.0/8;172.16.0.0/12"

This will allow designate-bind to perform a zone transfer to ``10.0.0.0/8`` and
``172.16.0.0/12``.

This change modifies the default behaviour of the ``allow-transfer`` setting.
To restore the default behaviour, set ``allow-transfer-nets`` to ``any``:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config designate-bind allow_transfer_nets=any

Improve Vault snap channel refresh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The refresh mechanism for the Vault snap managed within the vault charm has
been improved. It now properly stops the service before performing a snap
refresh. For more details see bug `LP #2007587`_.

Glance custom image properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The glance charm now supports configuring automatic custom image properties for
imported images.

To add custom properties, use a comma-delimited string of ``key:value`` pairs:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config glance custom-import-properties='property1:value1,property2:value2,property3:value3'

These properties will only be added to images that go through the
`Interoperable image import`_ process such as ``openstack image create
--import``. They will not be applied to regular image uploads.

magnum charm: new option to expose cluster_user_trust
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This configuration option controls whether to assign a trust to the cluster user
or not. This option needs to be set to True for clusters with
volume_driver=cinder, cloud_provider_enabled=true or registry_enabled=true in
the underlying cluster template to work. This is a potential security risk since
the trust gives instances OpenStack API access to the cluster's project.

For more details see bug `LP #1996237`_.

nova-cloud-controller charm: new relation to openstack-dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``juju integrate nova-cloud-controller:dashboard openstack-dashboard:dashboard``
allows nova-cloud-controller to know that possible hosts and IP addresses that
the cloud users use to access the OpenStack Dashboard, the nova-cloud-controller
units use this information to configure the nova-serialproxy daemon and `allow
requests`_ coming from the web browsers visiting the dashboard.

This relation is mandatory when the nova-cloud-controller application is
configured with `enable-serial-console`_ set to True.

For more details see bug `LP #2030094`_.

Documentation updates
---------------------

OpenStack 2023.2 guide updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Charm Guide and the Deploy Guide were updated for OpenStack 2023.2.

Juju 3.x guide updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Charm Guide and the Deploy Guide were updated for Juju 3.x.

Charm Guide changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* the project's backport policy was refreshed
* legacy charm revisions were published as reference material
* policy overrides page refactored into how-to, conceptual, and tutorial
  material
* ongoing improvements and corrections

Informational notices
---------------------

Ceph FileStore support removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OSD FileStore format has been deprecated in upstream Ceph starting with the
Quincy release. With the Reef release, `FileStore support has been removed`_,
leaving support for only BlueStore format.

.. warning::

   Data loss may occur if you attempt to upgrade to Ceph Reef when FileStore
   OSDs are present.

Before upgrading the payload ("OpenStack upgrade") of any of the Ceph charms,
migrate all FileStore OSDs to BlueStore. See upgrade path note :ref:`BlueStore
migration <bluestore_migration>` for guidance.

Nova ``AvailabilityZoneFilter`` removal in 2023.2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``AvailabilityZoneFilter`` option was removed from Nova in 2023.2 Bobcat
(see the `Nova 2023.2 upgrade notes`_).

In order for the scheduler to honour an availability zone request, there must
now be a Placement aggregate that matches the Nova host aggregate that was
assigned to an availability zone.

This should not technically affect users as the new configuration should have
been automatically done. However, verification steps have been provided as an
:ref:`upgrade path note <az_option_removal>`.

Enforce MTU size between Octavia networks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The behaviour of the Octavia loadbalancer charm has been changed to ensure that
the MTU size on the health manager port (typically called ``o-hm0``) matches
the MTU on the load balancer network (called ``lb-mgmt-net``).  Prior to this
change, when the MTU sizes were not aligned and the ``o-hm0`` MTU is less than
the ``lb-mgmt-net`` MTU, then health check messages will be dropped causing the
load balancer to fail-over.

The new behaviour is to *always* align the MTU of the health manager port
(``o-hm0``) to that of the load balancer network (``lb-mgmt-net``).

For more details please see bug `LP #2018998`_.

Removed features
----------------

hyperv mechanism driver
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The hyperv mechanism driver has been removed from the neutron-api charm. The
networking-hyperv (OpenStack Winstackers) project is now retired and the
package was removed from Ubuntu 23.10 (Mantic).

For more details see bug `LP #2036953`_.

Issues discovered during this release cycle
-------------------------------------------

Juju 3.x incompatibilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The keystone and glance-simplestreams-sync legacy charms (not using channels),
and stable channels Xena and before, do not work with a Juju 3.x controller.
The problems arising from upgrading these charms so that they (automatically)
use Juju 3.x unit agents are related to:

* Fernet key rotations (keystone)
* status setting and endpoint updating (glance-simplestreams-sync)

LXD container upgrade to jammy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While performing LXD container series upgrades from focal to jammy, these
containers may lose their IP addresses and network connectivity on reboot.

For more details see `Upgrade issues`_.

.. LINKS
.. _watcher charm: https://charmhub.io/watcher
.. _watcher-dashboard charm: https://charmhub.io/watcher-dashboard
.. _Watcher Dashboard plugin: https://docs.openstack.org/watcher-dashboard/latest/
.. _openstack-dashboard charm: https://charmhub.io/openstack-dashboard
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/overview.html
.. _charm repositories: https://opendev.org/openstack?sort=alphabetically&q=charm-&tab=
.. _Interoperable image import: https://docs.openstack.org/glance/latest/admin/interoperable-image-import.html
.. _allow requests: https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/configuration/config.html#console.allowed_origins_
.. _enable-serial-console: https://charmhub.io/nova-cloud-controller/configure#enable-serial-console_
.. _Nova 2023.2 upgrade notes: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/2023.2.html#upgrade-notes
.. _Aggregates in Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/admin/aggregates.html#aggregates-in-placement
.. _FileStore support has been removed: https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rados/configuration/storage-devices/#filestore
.. _Upgrade issues: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/project/issues/upgrade-issues.html

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #2007587: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/2007587
.. _LP #1996237: https://launchpad.net/bugs/1996237
.. _LP #2030094: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-nova-cloud-controller/+bug/2030094
.. _LP #2036953: https://launchpad.net/bugs/2036953
.. _LP #2018998: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-octavia/+bug/2018998
