=================
2023.1 - Antelope
=================

The 2023.1 (Antelope) OpenStack Charms release includes updates for the charms
described on the :doc:`../project/openstack-charms` page. As of this release,
the project consists of 62 stable charms.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule`.

.. note::

   Release notes contents is superseded by updated information published in the
   :doc:`index` (this guide) after the release of any given OpenStack Charms
   version.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Note that charm upgrades and
   OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For instructions on
   performing the different upgrade types see the
   :doc:`../admin/upgrades/overview` page.

.. contents:: Summary of changes:
   :local:
   :depth: 2
   :backlinks: top

New stable charms
-----------------

ironic-dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This charm provides the `Ironic Dashboard plugin`_ for use with the `OpenStack
Dashboard charm`_.

Usage example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju deploy --channel 2023.1/stable openstack-dashboard
   juju deploy --channel 2023.1/stable ironic-dashboard
   juju integrate openstack-dashboard:dashboard-plugin ironic-dashboard:dashboard


Infinidat storage charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are three new storage charms that allow the Infinidat storage appliance
to be used with Charmed OpenStack systems.

These charms are:

* `infinidat-tools`_
* `cinder-infinidat`_
* `manila-infinidat`_

They have been developed specifically for OpenStack Ussuri on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
(Focal) and thus have a 'stable' risk level for the 'ussuri' track. For more
recent tracks, the charms have been assigned the 'candidate' risk level and due
consideration should be taken to validate them prior to production usage. The
following channels (track/risk combination) are now available:

* ussuri/stable
* victoria/candidate
* wallaby/candidate
* xena/candidate
* yoga/candidate
* zed/candidate
* 2023.1/candidate

As testing occurs, on a per-track basis, the candidate charms will be promoted
to stable.

New stable charm features
-------------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the current guide (Charm Guide) that details
its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles`` directory of
the relevant charm repository (see all `charm repositories`_).

Service tokens
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Charmed OpenStack configures the deployed services to send service tokens now.
This change benefits users in, at least, the following situations:

* Security enhancement: Service tokens allow the control plane to differentiate
  between a privileged operation issued by another service (e.g. Nova
  requesting a volume operation to Cinder) and a regular user operation.

* Long running jobs: If an operation takes longer than the life of a regular
  user token, queries can fail, preventing the completion of requested
  operations.

For more details see `Using service tokens in Cinder`_ and bug `LP #1992840`_.

ironic-conductor charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new configuration options have been added to the ironic-conductor charm.

ovn-central charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ovn-central`` charm is now capable of seamlesly downscaling units. More
details can be found in :doc:`"OVN Central" downscaling guide
<../admin/ops-scale-back-ovn-central>`

Hardware enablement configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Option ``hardware-enablement-options`` allows operators to enable hardware
specific options in the Ironic Conductor service.

For example, to enable the `iDrac driver`_ the following commands can be used:

.. code-block:: none

   cat << EOF > ./idrac.ini
   [DEFAULT]
   enabled_hardware_types = intel-ipmi, ipmi, idrac
   enabled_management_interfaces = intel-ipmitool, ipmitool, noop, idrac-wsman
   enabled_inspect_interfaces = no-inspect, idrac-wsman
   enabled_power_interfaces = ipmitool, idrac-wsman
   enabled_console_interfaces = ipmitool-shellinabox, ipmitool-socat, no-console
   enabled_vendor_interfaces = ipmitool, no-vendor, idrac-wsman
   enabled_raid_interfaces = agent, no-raid, idrac-wsman
   EOF

   juju config ironic-conductor hardware-enablement-options=@./idrac.ini

Temporary URL timeout
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Option ``swift-temp-url-duration`` allows operators to fine tune the duration
of temporary URLs passed to ironic-python-agent to download the image that
needs to be installed. Environments that use large images and/or slow IO
baremetal nodes are encouraged to increase it.

For example, to set the duration to one hour:

.. code-block:: none

   juju config ironic-conductor swift-temp-url-duration=3600

Stable hostname for nova-compute service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nova-compute charm now supports a stable hostname for the nova-compute
service when rendering the ``nova.conf`` file. This prevents the daemon from
registering multiple entries (with different hostnames) in the Nova control
plane. This also affects the hostname used by ovn-controller, which allows for
situations where a new instance is allocated to nova-compute hostname
"foo.example.com" but the corresponding ovn-chassis is registered to "foo". For
more details see bug `LP #1896630`_.

Service user password rotation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The keystone, mysql-innodb-cluster, and rabbitmq-server charms have gained
actions to assist with rotating the passwords for the service users in an
OpenStack model. The passwords are auto-generated (not user-defined). Each
charm can rotate their service user passwords independently of the other
charms. These three charms represent all of the service user passwords in an
OpenStack system.

Service users are those users that are associated with applications that
provide services within an OpenStack system. Examples are 'glance', 'nova',
'heat', and 'keystone'.

Two actions are provided for each of the three above-mentioned charms:

* ``list-service-usernames``
* ``rotate-service-user-password``

They must be run on the leader unit:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run-action --wait <application>/leader list-service-usernames
   juju run-action --wait <application>/leader rotate-service-user-password service-user=glance

.. note::

   In Juju 3.x the :command:`run-action` command has been changed to
   :command:`run`.

The ``list-service-usernames`` action provides a list of usernames that can be
rotated, and the ``rotate-service-user-password`` actually performs a password
rotation for a single service user.

There may be a control plane interruption when a password is rotated. This is
due to the password being changed in the service provider (MySQL, Keystone, and
RabbitMQ) before it has been pushed out to the corresponding service user
applications. This may be mitigated however by the restart of the service
application, which will force a re-authentication of the service.

Issues discovered during this release cycle
-------------------------------------------

Neutron ML2 OVS plugin on DVR mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Environments configured to use the ML2 OVS plugin in DVR mode and have
configured an external network of type ``flat`` will be affected by bug `LP
#2015090`_. The symptom of an affected system is that newly launched instances
won't have access to the Metadata service and the ``neutron-dhcp-agent``
service log will contain the following error:

.. code-block:: none

   [...]
   2023-03-31 19:35:06.095 58625 ERROR neutron.agent.dhcp.agent return self._name[:constants.DEVICE_NAME_MAX_LEN]
   2023-03-31 19:35:06.095 58625 ERROR neutron.agent.dhcp.agent TypeError: 'bool' object is not subscriptable

Documentation updates
---------------------

Regular improvements and bug fixes. A new page on :doc:`../concepts/spaces` was
landed.

.. LINKS
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/overview.html
.. _Using service tokens in Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/cinder/2023.1/configuration/block-storage/service-token.html
.. _charm repositories: https://opendev.org/openstack?sort=alphabetically&q=charm-&tab=
.. _Ironic Dashboard plugin: https://docs.openstack.org/ironic-ui/latest/
.. _OpenStack Dashboard charm: https://charmhub.io/openstack-dashboard
.. _iDrac driver: https://docs.openstack.org/ironic/latest/admin/drivers/idrac.html
.. _infinidat-tools: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-infinidat-tools
.. _cinder-infinidat: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-cinder-infinidat
.. _manila-infinidat: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-infinidat

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1896630: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-nova-compute/+bug/1896630
.. _LP #2015090: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/neutron/+bug/2015090
.. _LP #1992840: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1992840
