============================================
2024.1 (Caracal) (Draft version in progress)
============================================

The 2024.1 OpenStack Charms release includes updates for the charms
described on the :doc:`../project/openstack-charms` page. As of this release,
the project consists of <NUMBER-OF-STABLE-CHARMS> stable charms.

For the list of bugs resolved in this release refer to the `2024.1
milestone`_ in Launchpad.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule`.

.. note::

   Release notes contents is superseded by updated information published in the
   :doc:`index` (this guide) after the release of any given OpenStack Charms
   version.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Note that charm upgrades and
   OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For instructions on
   performing the different upgrade types see the
   :doc:`../admin/upgrades/overview` page.

.. contents:: Summary of changes:
   :local:
   :depth: 2
   :backlinks: top

New stable charms
-----------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

New stable charm features
-------------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the current guide (Charm Guide) that details
its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles`` directory of
the relevant charm repository (see all `charm repositories`_).

manila charm: add support to configure scheduler default filters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The manila charm has a new configuration option `scheduler-default-filters`.
This configures the `scheduler_default_filters` parameter in manila
configuration file.

This is unset by default, so manila retains the default value for
`scheduler_default_filters`. Those might change based on OpenStack release.

For more details see bug `LP #1998200`_.

cinder charm: add support for Keystone audit middleware API logging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cinder charm has a new configuration option `audit-middleware`. This option
enables or disables Keystone audit middleware functionality that allows the
user to audit API requests and configure their environment for CADF compliance
(see `keystone_audit_middleware`_). These audit events are written to
`/var/log/apache2/cinder_error.log`.

This option is disabled by default to prevent log file bloat.

For more details see bug `LP #1856555`_.

Ironic: add support for OVN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OpenStack Ironic now supports OVN as the configured SDN of choice. The neutron-api,
neutron-api-plugin-ovn, neutron-api-plugin-ironic charms have been update to
support the necessary services and drivers to use OVN instead of Open vSwitch. To
use this feature, deploy OVN services and ensure that both the neutron-api-plugin-ovn
and neutron-api-plugin-ironic are deployed.

For more details see the `Ironic documentation`_ for OpenStack charms.

Documentation updates
---------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

New tech-preview charms
-----------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

New tech-preview charm features
-------------------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Informational notices
---------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Deprecation notices
-------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Removed features
----------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Removed charms
--------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Issues discovered during this release cycle
-------------------------------------------

<TITLE>
~~~~~~~

Changes backported to this release
----------------------------------

*none at this time*

.. LINKS
.. _2024.1 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/2024.1
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/upgrades/overview.html
.. _charm repositories: https://opendev.org/openstack?sort=alphabetically&q=charm-&tab=
.. _keystone_audit_middleware: https://docs.openstack.org/keystonemiddleware/latest/audit.html
.. _Ironic documentation: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/admin/compute/ironic.html

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1998200: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-manila/+bug/1998200
.. _LP #1856555: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1856555
