.. _release_notes_21.01:

=====
21.01
=====

Summary
-------

The 21.01 OpenStack Charms project release includes updates for the charms
described on the :doc:`../project/openstack-charms` page. As of this release,
the project consists of 60 supported (stable) charms.

For the list of bugs resolved in this release refer to the `21.01 milestone`_
in Launchpad.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../project/release-schedule`.

General charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_, that
details its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles``
directory of the relevant charm repository.

Cinder-Ceph - Image mirroring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cinder-ceph charm now supports image replication to a second Ceph cluster.
This is achieved by connecting its new relation ``ceph-replication-device`` to
the second Ceph cluster and setting its new ``rbd-mirroring-mode``
configuration option to 'image'.

Whether a particular Cinder Ceph image is replicated or not is determined by
its `Cinder volume type`_.

For implementation details see the `Cinder-Ceph replication development
notes`_.

Trilio charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Trilio charms will no longer be released with the same cadence as the other
OpenStack charms. Instead, they will be released shortly after releases of the
Trilio code. For instance, Trilio 4.1 is due in February and the Trilio charms
will be released shortly thereafter.

New charms
----------

n/a

Preview charm features
----------------------

Ironic charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Three new tech-preview charms are now available for the deployment of OpenStack
Ironic:

* ironic
* ironic-api
* ironic-conductor

Ironic provisions bare metal, as opposed to virtual, machines.

Deprecation notices
-------------------

Trusty series
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 'trusty' series is no longer actively tested and is now EOL in terms of
bug fixes for the OpenStack charms.

Removed features
----------------

RabbitMQ Ceph relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `ceph` relation in the rabbitmq-server charm is deprecated and will be
removed in the 21.04 charm release. The relation exists to support an obsolete
method of RabbitMQ clustering which involved sharing queue data between the
units using RBD volumes.

Removed charms
--------------

n/a

Known issues
------------

Lack of FQDN for containers on physical MAAS nodes may affect running services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When Juju deploys to a LXD container on a physical MAAS node, the container is
not informed of its FQDN. The services running in the container will therefore
be unable to determine the FQDN on initial deploy and on reboot.

Adverse effects are service dependent. This issue is tracked in bug `LP
#1896630`_ in an OVN and Octavia context. Several workarounds are documented in
the bug.

Barbican DB migration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With Focal Ussuri, running command ``barbican-manage db upgrade`` against a
barbican application that is backed by a MySQL InnoDB Cluster will lead to a
failure (see bug `LP #1899104`_). This was discovered while resolving bug `LP
#1827690`_.

Both the charm bug `LP #1827690`_ and the package bug `LP #1899104`_ are known
issues that will be addressed shortly after the 20.10 release.

The package bug only affects Focal Ussuri and is not present in Victoria, nor
is it present when using (Bionic) Percona Cluster as the back-end DB.

Series upgrade - vault charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a series upgrade is attempted while Vault is sealed then manual intervention
will be required (see bugs `LP #1886083`_ and `LP #1890106`_). The vault leader
unit (which will be in error) will need to be unsealed and the hook error
resolved. The `vault charm`_ README has unsealing instructions, and the hook
error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved vault/N

Octavia load balancers using OVN provider on Victoria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With OpenStack Victoria, creating an Octavia load balancer that uses the OVN
provider will fail due to bug `LP #1896603`_. This bug does not affect load
balancers that use the Amphora provider.

Ceph iSCSI on Ubuntu 20.10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-iscsi charm can't be deployed on Ubuntu 20.10 (Groovy) due to a Python
library issue. See bug `LP #1904199`_ for details.

Charm upgrade - rabbitmq-server charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A timing issue has been observed during the upgrade of the rabbitmq-server
charm (see bug `LP #1912638`_ for tracking). If it occurs the resulting hook
error can be resolved with:

.. code-block:: none

   juju resolved rabbitmq-server/N

Adding Glance storage backends
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a storage backend is added to Glance a service restart may be necessary in
order for the new backend to be registered. This issue is tracked in bug `LP
#1914819`_.

OVS to OVN migration procedure on Ubuntu 20.10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When performed on Ubuntu 20.10 (Groovy), the procedure for migrating an
OpenStack cloud from ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN may require an extra step due to Open
vSwitch bug `LP #1852221`_.

Following the procedure on the :doc:`../project/procedures/ovn-migration` page.
The workaround is to restart the `ovs-vswitchd` service after resuming the
ovn-chassis charm in step 15:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run-action --wait neutron-openvswitch/0 cleanup
   juju run-action --wait ovn-chassis/0 resume
   juju run --unit ovn-chassis/0 'systemctl restart ovs-vswitchd'

Documentation updates
---------------------

A summary of documentation updates is given below.

* `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_ (aka "deploy guide"):

  * The deploy guide has been completely refactored.
  * The install section has been updated to OpenStack Victoria.
  * The upgrades section has received an `Upgrades overview`_ page.

* `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (aka "charm guide"):

  * The OpenStack on LXD documentation was moved from the charm guide to the
    `openstack-on-lxd`_ repository. Users wishing to use an all-in-one OpenStack
    solution should explore the `MicroStack`_ project.

* Charm READMEs: cinder, glance, keystone, keystone-ldap, and vault.

Upgrading charms
----------------

Upgrading charms will making available new features and bug fixes. However, the
latest stable charm revision should also be used prior to making any
topological changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, or series
upgrades. Bug reports should also be filed against the most recent revision.

Note that charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For
instructions on performing the different upgrade types see `Upgrades overview`_
in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_.

.. LINKS
.. _21.01 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/21.01
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/upgrade-overview.html
.. _vault charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/src/branch/master/src/README.md#unseal-vault
.. _Cinder volume type: https://docs.openstack.org/cinder/latest/contributor/replication.html#volume-types-extra-specs
.. _Cinder-Ceph replication development notes: https://github.com/ionutbalutoiu/cinder-ceph-replication
.. _MicroStack: https://microstack.run
.. _openstack-on-lxd: https://github.com/openstack-charmers/openstack-on-lxd

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1890106: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1890106
.. _LP #1886083: https://bugs.launchpad.net/vault-charm/+bug/1886083
.. _LP #1884548: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-cinder/+bug/1884548
.. _LP #1827690: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-barbican/+bug/1827690
.. _LP #1904199: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-ceph-iscsi/+bug/1904199
.. _LP #1912638: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-rabbitmq-server/+bug/1912638
.. _LP #1899104: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/barbican/+bug/1899104
.. _LP #1896630: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-layer-ovn/+bug/1896630
.. _LP #1896603: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/ovn-octavia-provider/+bug/1896603
.. _LP #1914819: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-glance/+bug/1914819
.. _LP #1852221: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/openvswitch/+bug/1852221
