.. _release_notes_21.04:

=====
21.04
=====

Summary of changes
------------------

* New charm features
   * `ceph-osd charm: marking individual OSDs as 'out' or 'in'`_
   * `hacluster charm: scaling down`_
   * `nova-compute charm: scaling down`_
   * `nova-compute charm: query name of compute node`_
   * `nova-compute charm: list compute nodes`_
   * `openstack-dashboard charm: new option 'use-internal-endpoints'`_
   * `Global cap to charm option 'worker-multiplier'`_
   * `Denying service restarts and hook calls`_
   * `nova-cloud-controller charm: sync compute availability zones`_

* New tech-preview charms
   * `Magnum charms`_
   * `Manila charms`_

* Informational notices
   * `Trilio charms release cadence`_

* Deprecation notices
   * `hacluster charm: option 'stonith_enabled'`_

* Removed features
   * `RabbitMQ Ceph relation`_
   * `Runtime configuration of SR-IOV and acceleration`_

Overview
--------

The 21.04 OpenStack Charms release includes updates for the charms described on
the :doc:`../reference/openstack-charms` page. As of this release, the project
consists of 60 supported (stable) charms.

For the list of bugs resolved in this release refer to the `21.04 milestone`_
in Launchpad.

For scheduling information of past and future releases see the
:doc:`../reference/release-schedule`.

General charm information is published in the `OpenStack Charm Guide`_ (this
guide) which ultimately supersedes Release Notes contents.

.. important::

   Always upgrade to the latest stable charms before making any major changes
   to your cloud and before filing bug reports. Refer to section `Upgrading
   charms`_ below for details.

New charm features
------------------

With each new feature, there is a corresponding example bundle in the form of a
test bundle, and/or a section in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_, that
details its usage. Test bundles are located in the ``src/tests/bundles``
directory of the relevant charm repository (see all `charm repositories`_).

ceph-osd charm: marking individual OSDs as 'out' or 'in'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ceph-osd charm actions ``osd-out`` and ``osd-in`` can now target individual
OSD volumes. The previous behaviour was to act on all volumes - there is a new
keyword 'all' for that use case. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   juju run-action --wait ceph-osd/0 osd-out osds=osd.0,osd.1
   juju run-action --wait ceph-osd/1 osd-out osds=all

hacluster charm: scaling down
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The hacluster charm has a new action: ``update-ring``.

When a clustered application (working alongside the hacluster application) is
scaled down (i.e. ``remove-unit``) nodes in the corosync ring will not be
removed. The ``update-ring`` action performs the removal and updates the
corosync configuration accordingly. Failure to run this action will leave the
cluster in an "incomplete" state. The corosync ring does not need to be updated
when scaling up; it is automatically extended. See the `hacluster charm`_
README for more information.

nova-compute charm: scaling down
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nova-compute charm has two new actions: ``remove-from-cloud`` and
``register-to-cloud``.

These actions assist with the downscaling of a nova-compute cluster. The
``remove-from-cloud`` action unregisters a Compute service from the cloud and
is run prior to unit removal (``juju remove-unit``). This ensures that "dead"
services do not linger at the OpenStack level. The ``register-to-cloud``
action allows the operator to revert the process by re-registering the service
(providing unit removal has not been made). See the `nova-compute charm`_
README for more information.

nova-compute charm: query name of compute node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nova-compute charm has a new action: ``node-name``.

This action prints the node name of the nova-compute unit it is run against.

nova-compute charm: list compute nodes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nova-compute charm has a new action: ``list-compute-nodes``.

This action prints a list of all compute nodes registered in the cloud.

openstack-dashboard charm: new option 'use-internal-endpoints'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The openstack-dashboard charm has a new configuration option:
``use-internal-endpoints``.

Horizon's default behaviour is to use Keystone's public endpoint. When this
new option is set to 'true' Keystone's internal endpoint will be used instead.
This could be used when a cloud's topology restricts Horizon's access to the
public network.

This option is already available in other charms (e.g. nova-cloud-controller
and heat).

Global cap to charm option 'worker-multiplier'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For those charms that provide service workers their number is determined by the
``worker-multiplier`` charm option. There is a maximum number (a "cap") of four
workers that is applied when the option is not explicitly set. Previously the
cap was enforced only when an application was deployed to a LXD container. With
this new charm release, the cap is always applied.

This new behaviour takes effect upon charm upgrade.

Denying service restarts and hook calls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The deferred service events feature can be enabled on a per-charm basis to
avoid sudden service interruptions caused by maintenance and operational
procedures applied to the cloud.

This feature is currently supported by the following charms:

* neutron-gateway
* neutron-openvswitch
* ovn-central
* ovn-chassis
* ovn-dedicated-chassis
* rabbitmq-server

See the `Deferred service events`_ page in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment
Guide`_ for more information.

nova-cloud-controller charm: sync compute availability zones
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nova-cloud-controller charm has a new action:
``sync-compute-availability-zones``.

This new action will configure host aggregates in Nova with availability zones
of related nova-compute units. This action will add hypervisors to the
appropriate host aggregate but will not remove hypervisors from existing host
aggregates. The hypervisors are placed into the appropriate availability zone
as determined by the nova-compute charm. See `Availability Zones in the
nova-compute charm`_ README for more information on configuring availability
zones for compute services.

This action is supported on OpenStack Stein and newer.

New tech-preview charms
-----------------------

Magnum charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new tech-preview charms are now available for the deployment of OpenStack
Magnum:

* `magnum`_
* `magnum-dashboard`_

Magnum deploys Container Orchestration Engines (COE) such as Kubernetes, Docker
Swarm, and Apache Mesos onto OpenStack instances.

Manila charms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two new tech-preview charms are added to the current list of Manila charms:

* `manila-dashboard`_
* `manila-netapp`_

Manila is OpenStack's shared filesystem service.

Informational notices
---------------------

Trilio charms release cadence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Trilio charms will no longer be released with the same cadence as the other
OpenStack charms. Instead, they will be released shortly after releases of the
Trilio code. For instance, Trilio 4.1 is due in February and the Trilio charms
will be released shortly thereafter.

Deprecation notices
-------------------

hacluster charm: option 'stonith_enabled'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``stonith_enabled`` configuration option for the hacluster charm is
deprecated and will be removed in the next release of the OpenStack Charms.
Resource fencing (aka STONITH) is now always enabled for every node in the
cluster. See bug `LP #1881114`_ and `What is STONITH?`_ for more details.

Removed features
----------------

RabbitMQ Ceph relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``ceph`` relation in the rabbitmq-server charm is deprecated and will be
removed in the 21.04 charm release. The relation exists to support an obsolete
method of RabbitMQ clustering which involved sharing queue data between the
units using RBD volumes.

Runtime configuration of SR-IOV and acceleration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Neutron Open vSwitch and OVN charms will no longer perform runtime
configuration of SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VFs) or hardware acceleration.

Changes made to configuration options ``enable-hardware-offload``,
``enable-sriov`` and ``sriov-numvfs`` must be followed by a reboot of any
neutron-openvswitch or ovn-chassis units in order for the changes to take
effect. This is true regardless of when the changes were made (i.e. at
deploy-time or post-deploy).

This change of charm behaviour is necessary for two reasons:

1. Changing the number of VFs on a running system breaks connectivity to any
   running virtual machines.
2. For Hardware acceleration support there is a particular order in which
   components of the system must be set up for successful operation. Applying
   or changing the configuration at runtime would involve operations like
   removing and re-applying host network configuration, and could also lead to
   NIC firmware malfunction. As such, runtime application of configuration
   changes for the above mentioned configuration options falls outside the
   domain of what the charms can control.

Upgrading charms
----------------

Upgrading charms will making available new features and bug fixes. However, the
latest stable charm revision should also be used prior to making any
topological changes, application migrations, workload upgrades, or series
upgrades. Bug reports should also be filed against the most recent revision.

Note that charm upgrades and OpenStack upgrades are functionally different. For
instructions on performing the different upgrade types see `Upgrades overview`_
in the `OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide`_.

.. LINKS
.. _21.04 milestone: https://launchpad.net/openstack-charms/+milestone/21.04
.. _OpenStack Charms Deployment Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest
.. _OpenStack Charm Guide: https://docs.openstack.org/charm-guide/latest/
.. _Upgrades overview: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/upgrade-overview.html
.. _vault charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-vault/src/branch/master/src/README.md#unseal-vault
.. _hacluster charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-hacluster/src/branch/master/README.md#update-ring-action
.. _Migration from Neutron ML2+OVS to ML2+OVN: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/app-ovn.html#migration-from-neutron-ml2-ovs-to-ml2-ovn
.. _What is STONITH?: https://clusterlabs.org/pacemaker/doc/en-US/Pacemaker/1.1/html/Clusters_from_Scratch/ch08.html
.. _nova-compute charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/src/branch/master/README.md#cloud-downscaling
.. _Availability Zones in the nova-compute charm: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-nova-compute/src/branch/master/README.md#availability-zones
.. _charm repositories: https://opendev.org/openstack?sort=alphabetically&q=charm-&tab=
.. _magnum: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-magnum
.. _magnum-dashboard: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-magnum-dashboard
.. _manila-dashboard: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-dashboard
.. _manila-netapp: https://opendev.org/openstack/charm-manila-netapp
.. _Deferred service events: https://docs.openstack.org/project-deploy-guide/charm-deployment-guide/latest/deferred-events.html

.. COMMITS

.. BUGS
.. _LP #1881114: https://bugs.launchpad.net/charm-hacluster/+bug/1881114
